1. Introduction
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are an indicator that Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) are experiencing a transformative process, both digital and educational. MOOCs have often been portrayed as disruptive learning technologies within Higher Education, generating intense debates as to the extent to which they are game changers (BIS, 2013; Bulfin, Pangrazio & Selwin, 2014). The term `digital transformation' has been widely used during the last decade (Zhu, Dong & Kraemer, 2006; Andal-Ancion, Cartwright & Yip, 2003). This concept is often used to describe the application of digital technologies across all the activities of organisations, as an important factor for their success. Consultancy reports such as (PWC, 2015; Eggers & Bellman, 2015) identify universities as important actors in the digital transformation of British organisations. For example, a report by Deloitte identifies universities as relatively strong digital performers in the public sector, (Eggers & Bellman, 2015), especially when compared with other types of organisations. These consultancy reports also agree that employees' digital competencies are critical to successful digital strategies. Efforts should therefore be devoted to ensuring that organisations aiming at achieving digital maturity possess a digitally competent workforce, and universities are a representative example. HEIs are also experiencing a transformation process in their business models towards more entrepreneurial approaches (Clark, 1998) that necessarily involve transformation in the way educational provision is delivered. Although it is often suggested that digital technologies have not transformed pedagogy in Higher Education (Moodie, 2016), transformational practices can be carried out if due attention is placed on the use of these technologies in scholarly contexts (Weller, 2011). Online learning has a fundamental role in the above-mentioned educational and digital transformation in universities (Picciano, Seaman & Allen, 2010). MOOCs are perhaps the most prominent form of online learning that have emerged in the last few years, and hence the represent the scope of this thesis, as described in detail in the following subsection.

1.1. Research scope
This thesis aims to analyse the effects of MOOCs in universities from a specific perspective. That is, that when MOOCs are adopted in a university, opportunities arise for authentic 17

experiences of online learning provision. These experiences can result in professional development for the staff involved. This professional development can be analysed, broken down into the acquisition of a set of competencies, which in turn can be divided into digital competencies and educational competencies. The following extract, from a strategic document of Imperial College, a leading Russell Group university, provides a comprehensive description of the use of MOOCs as testing grounds for digital and educational transformation: "For our strategy to be successful, Imperial needs to offer a broad range of online courses. Large, open courses are an important part of this portfolio, because they can be test cases for high quality educational offering. Potentially the whole world will be watching and learning from our innovation, so these courses need to be technically superb, within research topics for which Imperial is globally renowned. It needs to be pedagogically sound, evidence-based and preferably taught by top researchers in the field. The knowledge that flows from producing these courses will spill over to innovation in on-campus learning, both in terms of novel pedagogy, in ways of assessing and testing, in learning analytics and new ways of rigorously testing novel pedagogies, in building and supervising the online learning community and in many other ways. Top researchers who have produced successful MOOCs will be more interested in teaching than they have ever been before, and the fringe benefits of that increased enthusiasm are significant. Producing top-level courses for the world will change on-campus teaching in profound ways." (Imperial College, n.d, p.36) The above extract sets the scope of this thesis: MOOCs as test cases for high quality educational offerings, to change on-campus teaching. For this change to happen, digital maturity in the institution is needed, and for this staff need to possess the competencies required for educational change. The aim of the thesis is to provide a detailed and structured analysis of how staff enhance these competencies, benchmarking them against established competency frameworks. This analysis has been conducted from an internal perspective, by a core team member of the MOOC production team of a university, with a strong personal motivation that will be described in the following subsection.

1.2. Rationale: a personal motivation
In this subsection, I am taking the liberty to use the first person to explain what led me to choose the topic I have been studying for over five years as a PhD student. The process that has led to this thesis is a personal and professional journey, as I have been dedicated to the production of MOOCs ever since I started my PhD studies, back in 2013. For this reason, I will be using a rhetorical style in which first person will be present in many passages of this thesis.

18

Early in 2013, a few Russell Group universities decided to dedicate resources to the production of MOOCs, in partnership with FutureLearn. Just prior to this, other British universities had pioneered the creation of MOOCs, partnering with American providers, such as the partnership between the University of Edinburgh and Coursera. Back then, FutureLearn was a newly created start-up, funded by the Open University, aiming to become a major online learning provider in the British Higher Education market. MOOCs were already a buzzword in Europe, since the year before in 2012, when US universities such as the MIT and Stanford delivered open courses to hundreds of thousands of people. Different universities embarked on the MOOC venture for different motivations, such as experimentation, marketing, outreach, innovation, or simply so as not to fall behind the bandwagon of a movement that was generating significant attention. All of them had something in common, however: there was a generalised awareness that the direction MOOCs could take was unknown. There was a great deal of speculation, but all universities who adopted MOOC knew that the aims were not concrete. The University of Southampton was one of these early adopters in the UK. Against this backdrop of novelty, effervescence and uncertainty, while I was undertaking a Masters Degree in Web Science, I decided to choose MOOCs as my research topic. This MSc was part of an integrated PhD programme in Web Science, the aim of which was to study the impact of the Web in society from a multidisciplinary perspective. I come from an education background, and I had to choose a topic for my MSc dissertation, and the subsequent PhD. The MOOC phenomenon ticked all the boxes. It had both a strong Web Science component and an education component. In the summer of 2013, I wrote the MSc dissertation. In this dissertation, I studied MOOC discourses in academic literature and Higher Education specialised journalistic media. Using Content Analysis, I discussed the tensions between sceptic and enthusiast accounts of the effects of MOOCs in universities. The findings of this dissertation were published in (White et al., 2014) As soon as I had completed the MSc dissertation, I joined the team that would develop the first MOOC delivered by the University of Southampton. The MOOC was about Web Science, the area of study of my MSc, and my subsequent PhD. I was charged with a challenging task: organising the teams of facilitators that would support the massive learning communities taking the MOOCs of the universities. I had taught online before, and I had received some training in teaching online. The format in which these new

19

MOOCs were delivered was completely new, however, and I had never taught to large and unknown audiences. There was a reasonably extensive body of literature about the delivery of elearning and online learning, especially from the research fields of computer-mediated communication, and computer-assisted language learning. There was a significant research gap, however, into how online learning at scale could be delivered, mainly due to its novelty. As a result, I decided to research on my own practice as a MOOC facilitation coordinator. I started by publishing my approach of `mentors as connectors' (León et al., 2015) and started exploring what skills MOOC mentors should hold (León, Yousef & White, 2015). I then began to research the experiences of human participants directly, starting with the teams of facilitators and focusing on the challenges that they came across when undertaking the daunting task of supporting thousands of learners in a course. These were early career academics, and did not have a great deal of teaching experience. They reported that the challenges they encountered led them to develop both digital skills and teaching skills. The findings were published in León, Fielding & White (2016). The findings of this work consisted of the challenges that MOOC facilitators would come across when supporting big learning communities, and the skills that they recognised having developed as a result. Those were the early days of my PhD project, I was working and researching simultaneously, and the research questions were starting to take shape: I knew I wanted to study how those who teach through MOOCs develop digital and teaching skills, something I considered worthy of study in contexts where digital technologies were transforming practices. By the time I finished the first study with early career academics, the university had been delivering MOOCS for more than two years. In parallel, the general discourse on MOOCs had been evolving worldwide, and this evolution was captured in a parallel study that I carried out as a follow-up to my MSc dissertation (León, White & White, 2015). The main conclusions of this parallel study were that the purposes for which universities invested in MOOCs were more defined than in the early years of MOOCs. Generally, MOOCs had come to be seen as experimentation tools for developing more formal online learning opportunities such as online masters, online certified courses, etc. Another important purpose was integrating MOOCs into the classroom, by leveraging not only the quality of their learning materials, but also the networked learning opportunities that MOOCs could offer.

20

My involvement in the digital learning department increased gradually, and my responsibilities progressed from coordinating the facilitation of MOOCs to contributing to learning design. When focussed on the facilitation, my main liaisons had been early career academics. When focussed on the design, however, my main liaisons were the experienced academics who led the content production of those MOOCs. I worked with these experienced academics nearly on a daily basis, producing MOOCs. Over frequent conversations with them, I noticed that MOOCs were becoming influential to their broader teaching practices, despite their extensive prior experience. For example, I heard many accounts of professors who rethought their way of lecturing certain topics thanks to having had to write it in a different format, having had to narrate it in front of a camera, or after reading the comments of learners who were not students at the university. I therefore decided to capture these accounts methodically, and embark on the next phase of my PhD project, by researching the experiences of these more established academics. I ran a oneday event in our university, to which I invited a wide range of academics and professionals. Informed by the findings in the first study with early career academics (León, Fielding & White, 2016), I inquired how MOOCs had transformed the practices of the more experienced academics who attended the event. I also went to a Spanish university for a research visit, and interviewed eleven academics who had been involved in MOOCs, asking them a very similar set of questions to that posed in the one-day event. The findings were varied, with a wide range of opinions and perspectives on how MOOCs had transformed their practices. These were published in León et al., (2018). Once I had completed, and published three studies  the desk study, the study with facilitators, and the study with experienced academics  I kept narrowing down the research questions of the overarching PhD project, by using established competency frameworks to determine which competencies were developed by academics in MOOC production. For this, I chose the UK Professional Standards Framework for teachers in Higher Education, and the Jisc framework of digital capabilities. At that time I studied Higher Education teaching competencies in depth, which resulted in an article published in (Ordóñez & León, 2017). I also decided to complete the PhD project cycle with a third group of interviewees, all experts in online education. I interviewed high profile participants: some of whom had led education innovation departments, some others who had developed competency frameworks, and others who had written influential books on digital and online learning. Their input was valuable, especially to cross-validate the findings of the previous studies. The findings have not yet been published. 21

In short, these five years have been an intense journey around MOOCs in universities which have equipped me with the background knowledge that I consider is required to identify the need for a study of academics´ competencies in respect to MOOCs, and also to make a contribution to this field. This thesis is the result of that process, and its outline is described in the following section.

1.3. Thesis outline
This thesis has been divided into six chapters, each of which contains an introduction with its own detailed outline. The chapters are as follow: The present chapter (chapter one) is the introduction, which has introduced the scope of the thesis, its motivation and its research problem. Chapter two contains a detailed overview of the MOOCs state-of-the-art, an overview and literature review about competencies and professional development in Higher Education, and a description of the theoretical framework within which research for this thesis has been carried out. Chapter three describes the methodology that has been used to conduct the research conducted for this thesis. In this chapter, the research questions are introduced, as well as a description of the data collection and analysis procedures used in all the projects that form this thesis. The chapter also contains the template against which the thematic analysis was conducted Chapter four presents the findings, following the structure of the template set out in chapter three. That is, it contains three main sections: two longer sections about digital competencies and teaching competencies, and a shorter section about values and attitudes. Chapter five discusses these findings, from the angle of the Activity Theory theoretical framework, in relation to the background literature presented in chapter two. Chapter six concludes the thesis by briefly summarising it. This chapter provides concrete answers to the research questions, as well as a set of recommendations. The limitations of this research project are also outlined in this conclusion, together with a description of future work plans to overcome these limitations.

22

2. Background and literature review
This chapter delimits the context of this thesis by discussing related research works. The chapter also describes the theoretical framework under which the thesis has been developed. The chapter is structured as follows:     Firstly, it provides a detailed exploration of the concept of competencies within professional settings in the HIgher Education industry. Secondly, it explores the state of the art of MOOCs. Thirdly, it briefly discusses the concept of transformation in Higher Education, and the role of MOOCs and digital technologies in such transformation. Finally, it describes the Activity Theory theoretical framework, and explains how this has been interpreted to guide the research conducted in this thesis.

2.1. Competencies
Competencies are an essential element of this thesis. It is thus important to specify what is meant by competencies in settings where the subjects teach using digital technologies. This section, therefore, starts by exploring and contextualising the concept of competencies and skills. The subsequent subsections will cover specific contexts: within educational transformation in Higher Education, online learning, and digital technologies in education. At this stage, it would be worth restating that the subjects of this thesis are academics in HEIs with teaching responsibilities. The main question here is whether these academics develop their digital and teaching competencies when involved in the production of MOOCs. The subjects were interviewed with two competencies frameworks in mind: the UK Professional Standards framework (UKPSF) (HEA, 2011) and the Jisc digital capabilities framework for staff in Higher Education (Jisc, 2018),. The themes used for the analysis of their responses were also based on these frameworks. Further subsections in this section will describe these frameworks in detail, together with related frameworks and related work about teaching with the support of digital technologies. These descriptions include details of how the frameworks were used for the the interview questions and subsequent analysis.

2.1.1. Competencies, skills, capabilities and literacies
Competencies, skills, capabilities and literacies are terms with many commonalities in their meanings, but also subtle differences subject to interpretation and negotiation. For example, Jisc defines digital literacies as "those capabilities which fit an individual for living, learning 23

and working in a digital society." (Jisc, 2014). Literacies, therefore, are understood as an ensemble of capabilities. Skills and capabilities also have subtle differences, with skills tending to be inherent to a task and subject to specification and measurement, and capabilities tending to be inherent to the individuals holding them (Heckman, 2016). Competencies are also often defined as multidimensional sets of skills, usually used in professional and educational domains. The term competency, therefore (discussed in more detail in the following subsection), will be used across this thesis to a much greater extent than capabilities and literacies.

2.1.2. The term `competency'
Competence and competency are synonyms, as reflected in most English dictionaries. Either both can be used to convey the same meaning, although the latter predominates in professional jargon. In this thesis, the term `competency' will be used by default, although in some instances `competence' will be used, when referring to others' work. Although the terms `competence' and `competency' are widely used in the education domain, they have become problematic due to the different meanings that they have come to acquire over time. Westera (2001) identified a growing interest in this concept in the late 1990s, in areas such as education, training and professional development. Westera argued that "unfortunately, the concept of competence is used in many different ways and it seems that its current meaning is based on common sense and ordinary language use rather than agreed definition--and this all too easily creates confusion of thought."(p.75). He acknowledges, however, a growing common understanding of the division of competencies into three dimensions: knowledge, attitudes and skills. This three-dimensional conceptualisation is in fact what will be used in this thesis. The problematic nature of the term has also been noted by Angulo (2008), who identified the extensive use of terms such as `competence' and `competent authorities' in European Higher Education governance documents following the Bologna declaration, such as the Prague Communiqué of the Bologna Process (EHEA, 2001), and the subsequent Bergen Communiqué (2005). Given the diversity of definitions around competencies, a key definition has been selected for this thesis. This definition is to be found in the DeSeCo project undertaken by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), which provided conceptual support to the widely known Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA):

24

Competency is the ability to appropriately respond to demands and undertake tasks. It emerges from the combination of practical skills, knowledge, motivations, ethical values, emotions, and other social and behavioural components that mobilise together to achieve an effective action (OECD, 2006).

2.1.3. The role of competencies in the digital transformation of education
The digital transformation of universities has generated the need for academics involved in teaching to be digitally competent. The main aspect of this digital transformation is the irruption of the Web in the classroom, whereby barriers of access to information have dramatically decreased (Windschitl, 1998). New forms of interaction and communication have also emerged, leading to the renegotiation of the concept of classroom, beyond the walls of a physical space where students and teachers gather for education to take place, to a much wider one in which students access learning activities through a wider set of virtual spaces, in a wider range of times in the day (Greenhow, Robelia & Hughes, 2009). The ability of students  especially HE students  to access information from and interact in social networks has raised the need to rethink the pedagogical approaches through which education is provided (Beetham & Sharpe, 2007), recognising the fundamental role that digital technologies now play. This need to rethink pedagogy as technology transforms academic practice has generated the concept of the digital scholar (Weller, 2011). Weller's idea of the transformation of academic practice is defined by the confluence of the open, digital and networked practices, as shown in figure 2.1 `Digital Practice Transformation':  Open practices consist of creating, using, and repurposing open educational resources (Cronin, 2017). An example would be a teacher sharing and editable version their slides in an open repository for everyone to use, and viceversa: a teacher using another teachers' slides, adapting the resource to their own purposes. Meaningful learning experiences can be designed with the use of open resources (Conole, 2012).  Networked practices consist of creating learning experiences in which digital tools are used to promote connections between all members of a community involved in the learning process, as well as resources and devices (Dirckinck-Holmfield, L; Jones, C. and Lindström, B., 2009).

25



Digital practices consist of incorporating the use of digital technologies to scholarly practices.

In this intersection of transformative practices, teaching requires a relatively new set of literacies, skills and competencies. The development of these competencies is a key theme to this thesis.

Figure 2.1: Digital Practice Transformation (After Weller, 2011).

Weller's three-dimensional categorisation of digital practice transformation provides a useful mapping that eases the study of transformational competencies. As such, it has been highly influential in the design of the templates of this thesis. I considered this model highly appropriate, although somewhat problematic. Its main weakness lies in the positioning of digital practices in the same plane as open and networked practices, because the latter are inherent to the former. That is, by engaging in open practices or networked practices, a practitioner is inherently engaging in digital practices, but not vice versa; i.e. by engaging in digital practices, a practitioner is not necessarily engaging in open practices or networked practices.

2.1.4. Teaching competencies
The following table, published in Ordóñez & León (2017) is a synthetisation of Zabalza's (2003) and Perrenaud's (2004) models for teaching competencies in Higher Education.

26

Table 2.1: Teaching competencies in Higher Education (in Ordóñez & León, 2017)

TEACHING COMPETENCY
Planning of the teaching and learning process Content preparation

DESCRIPTION

Encompassing the management of the different learning processes from a problem solution perspective, given the different discipline-specific pedagogies and the different stages of intellectual development. Applying awareness of the classroom diversity and knowing how to use a differentiated pedagogy. An emphasis is put on values education in all disciplines. Organising one's own continuous professional development is a new aspect of pedagogical innovation and development. It is the ability to choose the most appropriate training among the different options in the institutional offer. It is important to adapt the school context to the current society of information and knowledge. Both teachers and students must be competent in the use of technologies, and adapt these to their teaching and learning processes. Being aware of the needed and available resources to organise spaces, and selecting the most appropriate method, depending on the teaching activities proposed, and thence developing instructional tasks. In addition to the traditional competency of communicating, the need has emerged to stimulate and maintain the motivation for learning, as well as unlearning. The pedagogical skill of building the meanings of knowledge, and communicating it, is needed for interacting not only with students, but with all the educational community. Offering appropriate support and orientation, not only on the academic discipline, but also professionally once the student has graduated. It is important to keep in mind that assessing is not controlling or grading, but providing support for improvement. This competency suggests a relationship between the duties and dilemmas of the teaching profession, both in public and in private education, where there are a set of values for social change, involving ethical issues such as the prevention of prevent violence, prejudice and discrimination. This also includes fostering critical thinking, solidarity and justice.

Organisation and justification Use of new technologies Teaching methodology design Communication and interaction with students

Tutoring and counseling Assessment Reflection and research about teaching

2.1.4.1. Higher Education Teaching Competencies in the UK
The framework presented in the previous section above was used to conceptualise teaching competencies, with a focus in Higher Education. In this section, another framework is presented, which has largely influenced the theoretical and methodological models of this thesis. This framework is the UK Professional Standards Framework (UKPSF). The main reason why this framework has been used is that the research projects carried out for this thesis are particularly relevant to the UK Higher Education context. Not all the participants of 27

the studies that compose this thesis were teaching in UK HEIs, and a small number of them were not familiar with the UKPSF. As a recently recognised HEA fellow, however, I was highly familiar with it, and considered that the target audience of this thesis would be too. In the cases where an interviewee was not familiar with the UKPSF, additional time was used in the interview for contextualisation. In all those cases, participants could easily relate UKPSF concepts with equivalent frameworks with which they were familiar. 2.1.4.1.1. The UKPSF and the HEA The UKPSF is the main assessment instrument of the Higher Education Academy (HEA, 2011). The HEA is a not-for-profit organisation, now part of the newly created Advance HE consortium. Based in the UK, and operating both in the UK and abroad, the HEA advises on and certifies Higher Education teaching excellence. Since the 1980s UK HEIs have been demanding the development of teaching staff, and the HEA is a venture responding to that (Prosser et al. 2006). In those years, professional development programmes for Higher Education teachers started to proliferate in the UK (DfES, 2003), in line with an international trend aiming to enhance the pedagogical quality of the HE teaching provision (Boyer, 1990). By the end of the nineties, an influential report commissioned by the UK government, known as the Dearing Report (Dearing, 1997) contributed substantially to the recognition of the need for professional accreditation programmes in the UK HE system. The main forum for this accreditation at that time was the Staff and Educational Development Association (SEDA). This was superseded by the Institute for Learning and Teaching Education (ILTHE), which was absorbed by the HEA in the early 2000s. Those years witnessed a significant growth of accredited programmes, reaching 140 across the UK in 2006. The UKPSF was introduced in the same year as a competency measuring instrument to support the accreditation processes delivered by the HEA. The framework was revised in 2011, into the current version. The main changes consisted of the inclusion of advanced categories of HEA membership, namely Senior Fellow and Principal Fellow. The framework was also split into dimensions of practice and descriptors (Law, 2011), as will be described in more detail in the `UKPSF Description' subsection later on. 2.1.4.1.2. The UKPSF: Impact and debate As mentioned in the previous subsection, the UKPSF has had a significant impact in the UK HE system in the last decade, and has generated debate as a result.

28

An impact study carried out by Turner et al. (2013) reports a sustained growing trend in the number of practitioners who have been awarded formal recognition through the UKPSF. The numbers doubled from around 15k to 35K in the period of the study, from 2004 to 2012. This study found that most institutional representatives surveyed felt that the UKPSF had had a high level of impact, which involved a change of practice in the majority of cases. This change of practice mainly consisted of new approaches to "design of curricula for materials for accredited courses and/or workshops" (p.15). A number of case studies have portrayed the impact of the UKPSF as positive. For example, van Der Sluis, Burden & Huet (2017) recognise that schemes such as the UKPSF make a significant contribution to the professional development of HE teaching staff, by stimulating engagement and collaboration with other peers towards the improvement of the teaching provision. In that case study, it was reported that those who worked towards the HEA fellowship made changes to their teaching practice as a result. Other studies, however, have pointed out the limitations of such a framework. The main reported drawback seems to be the retrospective nature of the recognition scheme, rather than the framework itself. In this sense, the HEA recognition scheme has been deemed as a weak driver for change, as its attainment is based on the previous experience of the candidate, rather than the awareness or willingness to change in the future (Hibbert & Semler, 2015; Macfarlane & Gourlay, 2009). Another argument held to criticise the UKPSF is that it is an instrument for yet another of those accreditation programmes that make too small a contribution to the improvement of teaching quality and enhancement of the student experience, becoming just a box-ticking means for institutions to enhance their reputation (Onsman, 2009). At their best, Onsman argues, these programmes improve the confidence of teaching staff in the effectiveness of their own practice. Onsman proposes alternatives such as the delivery of short courses produced within the institution, and with therefore a more specific context that can have a more meaningful impact on the teaching competencies of the staff in the institution. Peat (2014) shares certain reservations in a similar direction, suggesting that that "the UKPSF runs the very real risk of becoming a tokenistic exercise, engaged in purely as a result of institutional pressure and league table priorities" (p.18). Another important concern raised by Peat (ibid.) is the risk of the UKPSF becoming a reinforcer of hierarchies within the institution, which have little to do with the teaching competencies of their holders, especially in the higher categories of the fellowships. This concern is in line with those raised by the University and College Union (UCU) when the framework was reviewed in 2011. In a public note, the UCU expressed their concerns about the risk of the new UKPSF "moving into 29

areas which are essentially matters for employer-union negotiations. As a trade union and professional association, we believe that the main function of the UKPSF should be as `an enabling mechanism to support the professional development of staff engaged in supporting learning', particularly in relation to accrediting institutional programmes for new staff." (UCU, 2011, p.1) Despite the debate that the UKPSF has generated, it is widely recognised as a valid method for measuring teaching competencies. Furthermore, the details and distributions of its descriptors respond to a careful design, as will be described in the following subsection. 2.1.4.1.3. The UKPSF and teaching competencies One of the main reasons why the UKPSF was used as an important piece of the inquiry instrumentation in this thesis is its three-dimensional division of competencies. As discussed in section 2.1.2 above, the division of competencies into cognitive, practical and behavioural dimensions is common to many competency frameworks, especially in the education domain (Westera, 2001). The UKPSF is not an exception, as represented in figure 2.2. In the figure, each of the dimensions of the UKPSF (within the circles) are mapped against the dimensions of other competency frameworks reported in Westera (ibid) (within the rectangles).

30

Figure 2.2: The dimensions of the UKPSF (after HEA, 2011)

As represented in figure 2.2, the UKPSF has three dimensions, with each of these having a set of components, as represented in table 2.2, totalling fifteen. These components are statements that provide additional detail as to what is meant in each of the dimensions. In order for staff to obtain their fellowship recognition, the HEA encourages the use of five components in the area of activity dimension as a structure to create a reflective account of professional practice. The remaining components in the two other dimensions should also be reflected and evidenced in that reflective account.

31

2.1.4.1.3.2. Table 2.2: Descriptions of the dimensions of the UKPSF (HEA, 2011)

Dimensions of the UKPSF Areas of activity "Design and plan learning activities and/or programmes of study" "Teach and/or support learning" Core knowledge "The subject material" Professional values "Respect individual learners and diverse learning communities" "Promote participation in higher education and equality of opportunity for learners" "Use evidence-informed approaches and the outcomes from research, scholarship and continuing professional development" "Acknowledge the wider context in which higher education operates recognising the implications for professional practice"

"Appropriate methods for teaching, learning and assessing in the subject area and at the level of the academic programme" "How students learn, both generally and within their subject/ disciplinary area(s)"

"Assess and give feedback to learners"

"Develop effective learning environments and approaches to student support and guidance"

"The use and value of appropriate learning technologies"

"Engage in continuing "Methods for evaluating the professional development in effectiveness of teaching" subjects/disciplines and their pedagogy, incorporating research, scholarship and the evaluation of professional practices" "The implications of quality assurance and quality enhancement for academic and professional practice with a particular focus on teaching"

The depth to which the component for each of the dimensions is achieved is reflected in the descriptors of the UKPSF. The UKPSF has the four descriptors shown in table 2.3. As the table shows, these descriptors are aligned with different levels of seniority and academic experience. They also provide an indication of which kind of positions would be suitable for holding the different levels of HEA fellowship, an approach that Peat (2015) has criticised for being a form of hierarchy reinforcement:

32

2.1.4.1.3.3. Table 2.3: Awards and descriptors of the UKPSF (HEA, 2011)

Descriptor "Demonstrates an understanding of aspects of effective teaching, learning support methods and student learning" "Demonstrates a broad understanding of effective approaches to teaching and learning support as key contributions to high quality student learning" "Demonstrates a thorough understanding of effective approaches to teaching and learning support as a key contribution to high quality student learning" "Demonstrates a sustained record of effective strategic leadership in academic practice and academic development as a key contribution to high quality student learning"

Fellowship level Associate Fellow

Eligible roles/experience Early career researchers with teaching support roles

Full Fellow

Academics with teaching responsibilities

Senior Fellow

Experienced academics with long teaching experience, with leading and advisory roles.

Principal Fellow

Highly experienced academics with roles at strategic levels.

As discussed in the sections above, the UKPSF is a widely recognised framework, with clear descriptions of the different types of teaching competencies. These descriptions, together with its three-dimensional division, are easily equatable with other frameworks used in different settings by a wide variety of academics with teaching responsibilities. It is for this reason that it was used in the interviews conducted in the third stage of this thesis with experienced education developers who would necessarily have used this or a similar framework at some stage of their careers.

2.1.5. The role of confidence in teaching competencies
In order to explore perceptions of staff in an organisation towards new tasks and technologies, it is advisable to determine how confident they are in their own abilities to perform such tasks. This section will outline some academic sources related to staff confidence. These sources tackle confidence from three different lenses: social cognitive theory, business and management science, and psychology. 33

In social cognitive theory, confidence is often also known as self-efficacy. In Bandura's work (1977), self-efficacy is described as the perceived capacity of individuals to perform specific tasks successfully. It is important that individuals believe they are able perform a task effectively, especially when such a task is new or challenging. The individuals in our study are academic staff at different levels, and the new and challenging task is teaching through MOOCs. Confidence should also be considered from a learning in the workplace angle, since staff in organisations go through learning processes when faced with new technologies, including MOOCs. Eraut (2010) devised a model in which confidence plays an important role in the informal learning processes of individuals in organisations. This model, shown in figure 2.3, places confidence and commitment as pivotal among the factors that affect informal learning in the workplace.

34

Figure 2.3: Factors affecting learning in the workplace (Eraut, 2010 p.269)

As Eraut suggests, "Much learning at work occurs through doing things and being proactive in seeking learning opportunities, and this requires confidence". (p.269) If appropriate performance is expected from a staff member in an organisation, and assuming this performance is the result of a learning process, their confidence will play an essential role in how effectively they learn. The role of confidence in professional effectiveness has been widely explored in the field of organisational science. For example, Kanter (2006) conducted a series of interviews with leaders in different kinds of organisations (sports teams, political parties, private companies). She found that self-confidence is widely seen as a beneficial factor for individuals' performance in those organisations. From the perspective of psychology, it is also worth mentioning the concept of "imposter syndrome", by which a person in a position of responsibility has a self-perception of being a fraud, often due to a perceived lack of knowledge and skills to undertake such position. Psychologists started to explore this construct at the end of the 1970s. Clance and Imes (1978) called it "imposter phenomenon" after observing it in high-achieving women who did not believe they deserved the professional positions they were holding. Research on this phenomenon then extended to other domains, as it was noted that it affected both genders in a wide variety of contexts, including faculty members (Topping, 1983). Topping noticed that imposter syndrome occurs especially, although not exclusively, with academics who have recently started their careers. In a more recent study, Brems et al. (1994) showed that 35

better student-teacher relationships occur where instructors do not exhibit imposter syndrome. Several scales have been devised to test for the presence of imposter syndrome within individuals, the most well-known of which are Clance's scale and Harvey's scale (Holmes, 1993). Although it is not considered a mental illness (it is not included in any DSM), it is often subject to psychological treatment (Clance, 1985). This construct will be used in part of this thesis to support the statements of some of the participants in the first study with Early Career Academics as to how performing low responsibility tasks such as facilitating in MOOCs can help overcome the self-perceptions of not being fit to undertake academic tasks, which could have a certain relationship to the aforementioned imposter phenomenon.

2.1.6. Digital competencies
The previous subsections have delved into competencies for teaching in HE as an important element in the contextualisation of this thesis. This subsection will focus on another important domain of this thesis, namely digital competencies. Digital competencies are an important aspect of citizen's livelihoods in the current digital society, and an important element for professional success in the current digital economy. Ferrari, one of the main authors of the DigiComp framework of the European Commission (2017), considers digital competencies to be a human right, since they are fundamental for being functional in today's society (Ferrari, 2012). In her analysis of existing digital competency frameworks, she synthesised their definitions into the following: "Digital Competence is the set of knowledge, skills, attitudes, abilities, strategies, and awareness that are required when using ICT and digital media to perform tasks; solve problems; communicate; manage information; collaborate; create and share content; and build knowledge effectively, efficiently, appropriately, critically, creatively, autonomously, flexibly, ethically, reflectively for work, leisure, participation, learning, and socialising." (Ferrari, 2012 p. 12) As with the numerous models and frameworks to define teaching competencies in educational and professional settings, there are a great many published and functional frameworks for digital competencies. In her preliminary study leading to DigiComp, Ferrari (ibid) identified twelve such frameworks. Most of these target general audiences, but some are specific to groups such as young people, adults and teachers. Frameworks addressed at teachers are specially relevant to this thesis and, from Ferrari's selection, the UNESCO ICT Competency Framework for Teachers (2011) should be highlighted for its social mission. This mission consists of equipping teachers of all stages, from primary to HE, with tools to enable their students to become a digitally literate 36

workforce. The UNESCO ICT framework defines several Information and Communication (ICT) competencies to incorporate technology and pedagogy in teaching practices, defining standards and guidelines for implementing these.

2.1.6.1. Digital competencies and digital literacies
The concept of digital competencies is strongly tied to that of digital literacies. Over the last two decades, both these concepts have been problematic for defining the ability to use ICTs in communicative contexts. Digital literacy was initially conceptualised by Paul Gilster as "the ability to both understand and use digitised information" (Gilster, 1997, p.2). This ability requires both technical and communicative skills, and has become the focus of attention of many organisations, who have broken down these literacies into different sets of elements, as, for example, with the Jisc digital literacies framework, discussed in detail in the next subsection. Gilster defined digital literacies but did not break them down into observable elements. A few years later, a few attempts were made in that direction, such as that of Martin (2005) within a Europan project called DigiEuLit. Literacies were broken down into four key elements:     The ability to perform digital actions in everyday life contexts The ability to adapt digital actions to different contexts and situations The incorporation of other literacies such as media literacy, information literacy and visual literacy The ability to learn in digital contexts, and to reflect upon one´s digital literacy development. The terms `digital competencies' and `digital literacies' are usually used to represent similar, although not identical, concepts. For example, Bawden (2008) includes digital competencies as one more element of digital literacies, together with attitudes and skills. An opposite treatment is that of Ferrari (2012), who includes literacies as a notion within other areas of competencies. As these two examples illustrate, these two terms are not clearly differentiated across the literature: they present many overlaps, and are problematic. In a systematic concept review, Spante et al. (2018) noted that these terms are used synonymously, or to underpin each other. They noted that the differences usually reside the regional context. For example, European policies are more prone to use the term `competencies' whereas UK frameworks such as Jisc are more prone to use `literacies'. Despite the frequent crossovers, digital competencies can be considered to be more tied to the ability to use digital technologies in specific contexts, for specific purposes. In that sense, 37

the European Commission (2006) defined digital competences as "the confident and critical use of information society technologies for work, leisure and communication". As explained in the previous section 2.1.2, this thesis will use the term `competencies' to refer to the literacies, skills, abilities and capabilities that are developed as a result of teaching through MOOCs. Competencies has been chosen over literacies because, after thorough analysis, a general distinction can be made between the two terms: Literacies tend to be referred to as the ability to get by in society, while competencies tend to be referred to as the ability to get by in professional and educational contexts. When terms such as skills, capabilities and literacies appear in this thesis, they are used when referring to the work of others, and the term competency will be predominantly used for the research carried out in the thesis.

2.1.6.2. The Jisc frameworks of digital literacies and capabilities
Jisc is a highly influential organisation in the UK Higher Education system. Its main activity consists of providing guidance about digital transformation in HEIs. As such, several frameworks have been developed under its umbrella. Two of these frameworks are especially relevant to this thesis, since they have been used as a reference point, not only in the interviews with participants, but also to address the thesis´ research questions about competencies for HE transformation. The Jisc Digital Literacies framework is the result of years of study of digital literacies in Higher Education. The framework that can be seen in figure 2.4 started to take shape in 2010 when Beetham and Sharpe (2013) devised a series of workshops in which they envisaged a staged process through which HE students progressed, which consisted of (from the most basic to the most sophisticated):     Access and awareness: being able to access the digital tools to facilitate technology enhanced learning Skills: ability to use these tools comfortably Practices: ability to carry out tasks successfully and interact by using these tools Attributes/identities: ability to behave critically and ethically, and thrive in digitally enhanced environments. Later on, in 2011, Jisc started the `Development of Digital Literacies' programme, aimed at promoting digital literacies across Higher Education, through the provision of resources, recommendations and dissemination events. Some of the main outputs were a consolidated

38

categorisation of different types of digital literacies (see figure 2.4) and the following definition: "By digital literacy we mean those capabilities which fit an individual for living, learning and working in a digital society. For example, the use of digital tools to undertake academic research, writing and critical thinking; digital professionalism; the use of specialist digital tools and data sets; communicating ideas effectively in a range of media; producing, sharing and critically evaluating information; collaborating in virtual networks; using digital technologies to support reflection and PDP; managing digital reputation and showcasing achievements." (Jisc, 2014)

Figure 2.4: JISC framework for digital literacies

39

Jisc also developed a programme more addressed at HE staff, called `Building Digital Capabilities', recently archived (Jisc, 2018). As shown in figure 2.6, the different elements of the framework revolve around the ability to use Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), and are all encompassed by the ability to hold a digital identity and maintain digital wellbeing.

Figure 2.6: Digital Capabilities Framework (Jisc, 2018)

2.1.7. Digital teaching competencies
Jisc and the HEA joined forces to develop a measurable framework specific for teachers, in which the descriptors of both the UKPSF and the Digital Capabilities Framework were synthesised into one. The result was the Digital Lens of the UKPSF. (HEA, 2017). The resource was designed for academics with teaching responsibilities in Higher Education, but it also addresses professionals in the third space such as education developers, learning designers and learning technologists.

40

2.2. MOOCs and online learning
2.2.1. Literature about MOOCs
The inception of MOOCs in 2008 and its outbreak to massive audiences in 2011 has been accompanied by a significant contribution to the corpus of literature on online learning. Nearly 500 academic publications about MOOCs have been identified to date by the Southampton MOOC Observatory (https://www.mendeley.com/groups/2754851/moocobservatory/). Such a high number of publications could be interpreted as a reflection of the interest awakened by the MOOC phenomenon, which peaked in 2013 according to Google trends (see chart below). Google trends cannot determine what is of interest to the academic community, but it can provide useful evidence to support what is widely claimed: MOOCs became trendy for both the general public and academia in 2012 and 2013, but this interest has been slowly decreasing since 2014.

Figure 2.6. Google Trends graph about MOOCs

2.2.2. Published literature reviews on MOOCs
Identifying trends in such a large body of literature can be a challenging task (Fournier et al. 2014), although nonetheless one that can help determine the relevance of the issues around MOOCs in higher education institutions. A quick analysis of literature reviews around 41

MOOCs can help understand what are the most commonly addressed questions, as well as identify research gaps that need filling. These literature reviews have a significant impact in the MOOC research community. Judging from their bibliometric figures, it could be inferred that researchers often use these literature reviews to establish the context in their publications (see table below, where the third column shows the number of citations found in Google Scholar as of January 2018). Several attempts at comprehensive MOOC literature reviews have been conducted in order to understand what aspects of these courses draw most interest to academic and journalistic communities. Perhaps the most influential literature review is that of Liyanagunawardena, Adams and Williams (2013), which spotted a dramatic increase of publications about MOOCs in 2012. This review identified that a majority of articles tended to address technological aspects of MOOCs, but that there is a lack of research drawing on educators' and facilitators' experiences. This gap is being addressed in this thesis. That year, Haggard et al. (2013) published an analysis of MOOC discourses through a review of 113 sources, both academic and journalistic. This review concluded that MOOCs were a hot topic back then, with a large number of voices with opinions divided between how harmful, beneficial or insignificant MOOCs were going to become in HEIs. The review identifies many sources analysing the impact of MOOCs in HEIs and in learners, but it does not explicitly mention research addressing the impact of MOOCs in educators, which again is the focus of this thesis. One year later, Yousef et al. (2014) reported a sharp increase in the number of MOOC publications in respect of that reported by Liyanagunawardena, Adams and Williams the year before. Yousef's review identified two main needs for a positive evolution of MOOCs: a wider agreement on the conceptualisation of MOOCs, and the application of established pedagogical theories in the development of these courses. That same year, Ebben & Murphy (2014) analysed a corpus of 25 articles to identify MOOC research trends as a sequence of two phases. In the first phase, there was a predominance of networked learning research, while the second phase focused on massiveness, learning analytics and critical discourse. A very similar trend has been identified in more recent metaresearch, where it has been noted that, a) publications on xMOOCs significantly outnumber those of xMOOCs, b) there has been an increase of publications critical towards the overall concept of MOOCs, and c) publications about MOOCs continue to show a growing trend.

42

2.3.2.0.0.1. Table 2.4: Most influential MOOC literature reviews
Publication Sources (area and number)

Citations 702

Liyanagunawardena, T., Adams, A., & Williams, S. (2013). MOOCs: A systematic study of the published literature 2008-2012.The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 14(3), 202-227.

Academic (45)

Gasevi, D., Kovanovic, V., Joksimovic, S., & Siemens, G. (2014). Where is research on massive open online courses headed? A data analysis of the MOOC Research Initiative.The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 15(5), 134-176.

Academic (266)

148

Ebben, M., & Murphy, J. S. (2014). Unpacking MOOC scholarly discourse: A review of Academic (25) nascent MOOC scholarship.Learning, Media and Technology, 39(3), 328-345.

124

Haggard, S., Brown, S., Mills, R., Tait, A., Warburton, S., Lawton, W., & Angulo, T. (2013). The maturing of the MOOC: Literature review of massive open online courses and other forms of online distance learning.Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, UK Government. Yousef, A. M. F., Chatti, M. A., Schroeder, U., & andHarald Jakobs, M. W. (2014). A Review of the State-of-the-Art. InProceedings of CSEDU2014, 6th International Conference on Computer Supported Education(pp. 9-20).

Academic and journalistic (113)

104

Academic and journalistic (84)

79

Veletsianos, G. & Shepherdson, P. (2016). A systematic analysis and synthesis of the empirical MOOC literature published in 2013-2015.The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 17(2), 198-221.

Academic (183)

67

Bulfin, S., Pangrazio, L., & Selwyn, N. (2014). Making MOOCs: The construction of a new digital higher education within news media discourse.The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 15(5), 291-305.

Journalistic (371)

60

Kovanovi, V., Joksimovi, S., Gasevi, D., Siemens, G., & Hatala, M. (2015). What public media reveals about MOOCs: A systematic analysis of news reports.British Journal of Educational Technology, 46(3), 510-527.

Journalistic (3958)

48

Raffaghelli, J., Cucchiara, S., & Persico, D. (2015), Methodological approaches in MOOC research: Retracing the myth of Proteus,British Journal of Educational Technologies, 46(3), 488-509.

Academic (60)

42

Leon-Urrutia, M., White, S., & White, S. (2016). MOOCs in Higher Education Journalistic (112) Magazines: A Content Analysis of Internal Stakeholder Perspectives. In S. Zvacek, M. T. Restivo, J. Uhomoibhi, & M. Helfert (Eds.),Computer Supported Education: 7th International Conference, CSEDU 2015, Lisbon, Portugal, May 23-25, 2015, Revised Selected Papers(pp. 395­405). Cham: Springer International Publishing. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-29585-5_23

9

Sa'don, N. F., Alias, R. A., & Ohshima, N. (2014). Nascent research trends in MOOCs in higher educational institutions: A systematic literature review. InWeb and Open Access to Learning (ICWOAL), 2014 International Conference(pp. 1-4). IEEE.

Academic (164)

8

43

Sangrà, A., González-Sanmamed, M., & Anderson, T. (2015). Meta-analysis of the research about MOOCs during 2013-2014.Educación XX1, 1-28.

Academic (228)

6

Bozkurt, A., Akgün-Özbek, E., & Zawacki-Richter, O. (2017). Trends and patterns in Academic (45) Massive Open Online Courses: Review and content analysis of research on MOOCs (2008-2015). The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 18(5).

5

2.2.3. The Southampton MOOC Observatory Mendeley group
The Southampton MOOC Observatory is a research group, mainly composed of early career researchers in the field of MOOCs. This research group set up a Mendeley group, a social media add-on to the Mendeley reference manager. The Mendeley group 1 is open, and members from the MOOC research community have been joining since it was set up.

2.2.4. History and context of MOOCs within online education
MOOCs can be included as an important landmark in the history of distance education. Different authors have made attempts to establish historical stages, or generations from varied perspectives, both socio-technical (Moore & Kearlsleigh, 2011; Taylor, 2001), and pedagogical (Anderson & Dron, 2010; Garrison, 2011). In this subsection, the history of MOOCs is explored from the following perspectives:    Firstly, the advent of MOOCs from a socio-technical perspective of online and distance education is presented. Secondly, the role of MOOCs in the pedagogical evolution of online learning is provided. Thirdly, the current picture of the online education industry in the UK is described.

2.2.4.1. Online and distance education: a socio-technical perspective
Most of the above-mentioned authors concur that distance education had a first generation in correspondence studies. The origins can be traced back to the 18th century, when the Boston Gazette advertised correspondence courses. A century later, there was a drive within American society to encourage studies at home for adults who could not otherwise access education. That sparked the proliferation of universities that would offer correspondence courses to significant numbers of distance learners (Moore & Kearlsleigh, 2011). The term "distance education" was actually coined by the University of Wisconsin-Madison at the end

1

https://www.mendeley.com/community/mooc-observatory/

44

of the nineteenth century (ibid). This university started innovating with the use of new media, by sending recorded lectures in phonograph form. With the introduction of broadcasting media, a commonly named "second generation" (Moore & Kearlsleigh, 2011; Taylor, 2001; Keegan, 1993) of distance education emerged. Broadcasting technologies made it possible to reach wider audiences through faster and simpler dissemination. Also, early instances of student-tutor and student-student interaction could be observed, although with very limited options for pedagogical innovation (Anderson & Dron, 2010). Although a richer variety of formats emerged mainly TV and radio, which permitted innovation in the production of content and materials, this was mainly a one-way interaction from the tutor to the learner, aided only by early audio-conferencing technologies, which would allow learning in groups, with tutors being able to offer tuition in numerous locations simultaneously (Garrison, 1985). The subsequent generation can be thought of as one in which whole systems were set up exclusively to deliver distance education (Daniel, 2006). Organisations entirely dedicated to distance learning emerged by the end of the 1960s, being the UK Open University, the first to deliver distance courses using the broadcasting technology of the previous generation. These institutions did not take long to proliferate. Only one year after, Athabasca University was created in 1970, followed by FernUniversitat in Germany in 1974. These institutions leveraged technological factors such as the diversification of media, and strong support from their respective governments, to earn a reputation for delivering accessible, affordable and high quality education as an alternative to studying in a traditional university (Daniel, 2018). Daniel conceptualises these three concepts  access, affordability, quality  as the socalled `Higher Education triangle' (Daniel, Kanwar & Uvali-Trumbi, 2009). The proliferation of Open Universities extended over time, with new institutions being created later on in the nineties, such as the Open University of Catalonia. That institution was created with the the same lifelong learning mission as its predecessors, addressing the needs of the emerging `information and communication society' and `knowledge society' of the early twenty-first century, with a determined and intensive use of new information and communication technologies (Duart, Salomón & Lara, 2006). Moore & Kearsley (2011) identified a fourth generation, which they labelled as `teleconferencing'. In the United States, the eighties witnessed a rapid growth of teleconferencing technologies for distance education. The affordances provided by these new communication technologies led educationalists to envision myriad opportunities for pedagogical innovation. As Garrison commented back then, "Teleconferencing technology, 45

and the resulting change in conceptualizing education at a distance, will help bring it back to the larger field of education where it properly belongs" (Garrison, 1990, p.23). The transition to the next generation of distance education was accelerated by the advent of the World Wide Web. Just a few years before, the development of digital technologies was growing quickly, with computers affording the management of large textual corpora, images, video and audio (Demiray & man, 2001). Content in a wide variety of formats could not only be easily stored and reproduced, but also distributed, firstly in networks with the Internet, boosted then at large scale through the Web. Web-based education spread quickly, bringing ease of access to large quantities of published information. This quickly evolved with the introduction of authoring tools in the picture. Web users quickly became content publishers, initially aided by the proliferation of virtual classrooms, also called Virtual Learning Environments (VLEs), which are still today influential technological systems in universities for online learning provision, both on campus and at a distance. Authoring tools started to diversify later on, providing tools for both teachers and learners to produce a wide range of digital artefacts.To this, the power of social networking technologies completes the picture of a current distance learning generation with high potential to transform education. The extended use of this combination of technologies, together with a drive from the open education movement, is what paved the way to the irruption of MOOCs in higher education. The distance learning generation to come involves technologies that, although they have a certain state of maturity, are still in their early infancy for pedagogical use. These are the three acronyms: VR, AR and AI (Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality and Artificial Intelligence). The pedagogical exploitation of all the above-mentioned tools is a different story, which will be discussed in the next subsection.

2.2.4.2. Distance education from a pedagogical perspective
The previous subsection has addressed the evolution of learning technologies for distance education. This section will delve into how pedagogies have evolved over the last decades to accommodate the needs of the learning communities using new information and communication technologies, with a focus on the evolution from distance learning to online learning. Anderson and Dron (2010) divided the evolution of learning theories in the context of `online' into three stages.. The first stage was dominated by behaviourist approaches, in which learning occurs in a one-way transmission of knowledge from the content created by the

46

educator, to the learner, under a guided process with limited flexibility. These guidelines are set up by the expert, who not only decides what knowledge is to be acquired, but also through what process learning is going to take place. Although such an approach coexisted in time with others involving more social interaction, it was considered the most effective because of the individualisation of the learner, and its flexibility (Holmberg, 1989). Another feature of this unidirectional approach is that it has often been considered to be highly scalable, and indeed this is why it was adopted by the first MOOC platforms, when MOOCs started to have tens and even hundreds of thousand learners (Rodriguez, 2012). Such a statement is not without controversy, as the claimed scalability of MOOCs using behaviourist pedagogy has been widely questioned. Davidson, for example, suggests that pedagogy heavily based on the transmission of content does not scale well because it has limited assessment methods, and it does not adapt to learner diversity (2012). Anderson & Dron's second stage consisted of the incorporation of social constructivist pedagogical approaches. These were made effective with the advent of computer-mediated social interaction tools such as videoconferencing and live chats. Built on a combination of Vygotsky's sociocultural theory and Piaget's developmental theory, social constructivism places context as the cornerstone of the learning process (Bandura, 1977). Learners build new knowledge over the foundations of their own existing knowledge, assisted with the scaffold of a context managed by the instructor. Such an approach demands interaction with peers, but also a great deal of dedication from the instructor, despite its non "sage on the stage" role. This is the main challenge for the scalability of MOOCs using such an approach. Such a scalability challenge is addressed in Anderson & Dron's third generation of technology-enhanced distance education pedagogy, namely connectivism. Assuming a ubiquitous access that allows us to form dense and highly interactive networks in the Web (Castells, 1996), George Siemens and Stephen Downes theorised that knowledge is encompassed in actors such as students, teachers, educational materials and social media. The learning process consists of exploiting these networks as a pedagogical approach. Connectivism often encourages the use of communication tools external to the VLEs, where interaction takes place in open environments (Bell, 2010). Like social constructivism, connectivism demands intense activity from the instructor. The teacher neither provides knowledge, nor distributes it, but they need to be a central node in the network for a successful learning process (Kop & Hill, 2008).

47

2.2.4.3. Online distance education in the UK HE: the current picture
The questions posed in this thesis extend from the assumption that the UK higher education system is experiencing a significant rise in online learning programmes within its institutions. This section aims to provide grounds for this assumption by exploring the scene of online higher education in the UK from a market perspective, and outlining the main strategic moves towards online education made by UK universities, with a focus on those in the Russell Group. About a decade ago, the UK online higher education market was dominated by the Open University, with only a small number of other HE institutions offering short online distance courses, mainly postgraduate (White et al. 2010). Back then, most British individuals considering pursuing a degree online would automatically think of the Open University. There were other British institutions offering online tuition, but in most cases these were the result of individual or departmental ventures aside from the educational strategies of these institutions. These `cottage industries' did not seem to influence institutional strategies towards a serious bet for tuition beyond their bricks and mortar (Webster, 2017). In the meantime, other countries had a more diversified pool of providers offering online higher education to wider audiences. The supply and demand in the US was significantly higher than that of the UK, judging from the comparison between the Sloan consortium reports of those years accounting for the US (Allen & Seaman 2006; Allen & Seaman 2007; Allen & Seaman 2008) and the HESA reports accounting for the UK (HESA, 2008). Just as an illustrative example, HESA reports that slightly over 100,000 were enrolled in distance learning programmes in 2007, most of them in the Open University. That year, Allen & Seaman report nearly four million in the US. Later on, MOOCs came into the scene of UK higher education. The University of Edinburgh partnered with Coursera to pioneer MOOCs at a large scale with the launch of a series of MOOCs in early 2013 (BIS, 2013) to be immediately followed by the creation of the FutureLearn platform, who partner with a number of Russell Group universities to create open online courses in the UK context. Many UK universities joined the MOOC bandwagon, which coincided with the noticeable increase of credit-bearing online distance education programmes that can be appreciated today. Whether MOOCs have been the catalyst of this change is a frequently discussed argument (León, White & White, 2015). The fact is that the dominance of the Open University as a formal online distance learning provider in the UK seems to be coming to an end, as many other universities are including credit-bearing online learning programmes in their portfolio, beyond the informal offerings of 48

MOOCs. Today, there is still little data available to report a significant growth of distance online student numbers in the UK higher education. There are certain indicators of a growing trend, however. One of these indicators is the current determination of UK HE providers to incorporate fully online learning programmes in their offerings (Webster, 2017). An exploration of the current education strategies of the Russell Group universities that I recently carried out (see appendix 3 `Russell Group Online Learning Strategies') suggests that a fair proportion of these universities have finally decided to put mechanisms in place to support online learning, both at a distance and blended. Illustrative examples are those of the major London universities  King's College, UCL, Imperial College , and Scottish Universities  Edinburgh, Glasgow  which have invested in dedicated departments to develop distance online learning programmes. Their strategy documents have a few commonalities in that respect: with the inclusion of online learning programmes, they aim to add flexibility and innovation to their programmes. They also aim to recruit more students and, in turn, to diversify their pool of students. To this end, many of these universities are partnering with established private online learning providers such as Pearson, Laureate, Cambridge Education Group and FutureLearn. These providers can supply a few areas which universities have difficulties reaching: they are able to reach a wider range of potential students than universities, through their fully dedicated marketing departments. Also, they can provide expertise in learning design and learning technologies, since they have more staff recruitment flexibility, being able to quickly create teams of technologists and designers. They also own powerful tools for certification, record keeping and customer support. All these ancillary services can be easily absorbed by these providers, and many universities have found in this kind of externalisation the solution to their shortage of operational capacity to deliver online programmes.

2.2.5. Classifications of MOOCs
MOOCs can adopt many different shapes depending on the pedagogical approach on which they are based. As a result, many attempts have been made to group them into categories. Perhaps the most commonly known is that of Rodriguez (2012), who distinguished them into those within a connectivist paradigm, and those within an instructivist paradigm. The former, know as cMOOCs, were thought of as courses in which all members of the learning community interacted and contributed to the knowledge that the course would generate, with the guidance of the instructor. The latter were thought of as courses where one node, the

49

instructor  or team of instructors , was the sole knowledge generator from which a massive learning community would learn. The cMOOCs vs xMOOCs distinction has often been deemed as insufficient to describe the variety of pedagogical approaches with which MOOCs can be designed (Conole, 2016), and more sophisticated categorisations have been made subsequently. For example, Clark (2013) proposed a taxonomy of eight different types of MOOCs, although he warned it was just a start, and that these categories were not mutually exclusive :         transferMOOCs: a traditional module converted into a MOOC madeMOOCs: a MOOC conceptualised from scratch, with innovative formats synchMOOCs: an event-driven MOOC, with start and finish dates, and deadlines asynchMOOCs: a self-paced, continuously open MOOC adaptiveMOOCs: a MOOC with automated personalisation of learning experiences groupMOOCs: a MOOC that relies on collaborative learning connectivistMOOCS: a MOOC that relies on networked learning miniMOOCs: a short MOOC addressing specific and few learning outcomes

In view of the multiple and complex shapes that MOOCs were adopting as a result of their massive proliferation, Conole (2014) proposed a multi-dimensional classification, offering twelve different spectra in which MOOCs could be situated:     Openness: Most MOOCs are a combination of fully open resources and resources under licenses with different degrees of openness. Massiveness: This is also a wide and varied spectrum, from dozens of learners to hundreds of thousands. Use of multimedia: MOOCs differ massively in terms of the formats in which information is presented. Degree of communication: There are MOOCs that do not differ much from a textbook, and there are MOOCs in which all the activities are set around communicative actions, usually between members of the learning community, but also, quite often, with the instructors.  Degree of collaboration: Some MOOCs require interactions with the learning community, some others are addressed at individuals with little time to interact with others. There are many others that are designed for learners with varying degrees of willingness to collaborate, supporting various degrees of collaboration.

50



Learning pathway: at the lower end of the spectrum, the MOOC can only be completed in a prescribed sequence. At the higher end, the MOOC supports multiple learning pathways.



Quality assurance: There are MOOCs that follow little to no quality assurance processes. There are others that need to pass thick quality assurance filters to be released. Those filters are often set by the platform providers, although certain HEIs have their own quality assurance processes. When both the platform and the university enforce these processes, releasing a MOOC can be challenging for academics.



Certification: There is also a wide spectrum in that respect, especially nowadays with the introduction of credit-bearing MOOCs in the UK (The Guardian, 2016). Most MOOCs offer a means to demonstrate the effort made by the learner in one way or another, although with varying degrees of endorsement.



Formality: This dimension is tied with the certification dimension. MOOCs tend to lie on the lower end of the formality spectrum, most of them being optional and informal. The inclusion of MOOCs in formal learning contexts such as HE modules, however, can move certain MOOCs to the higher end.

 

Autonomy: Depending on the amount and nature of support that a MOOC can offer, it will demand more or less autonomy from the learner. Diversity: There is a wide range of diversity of learning communities that MOOCs can address. Some MOOCs target highly diverse audiences, who complete the course for highly diverse purposes. Some other MOOCs target highly specific audiences at highly specific levels, sometimes with specific prerequisites.

In summary, MOOCs are highly diverse in many different dimensions. So much so that patterns are very difficult to establish. Studying phenomena derived from MOOCs  as in this thesis  should take the existence of different types of MOOCs with due caution. This is why this thesis will not take into account the types of MOOCs on which the participants were working, apart from providing a certain degree of commentary to the pedagogical tradition of the teams of academics studied in the thesis. In all cases for this thesis, therefore, the type of MOOC will be irrelevant.

51

2.3. Higher education transformation
Another important concept in this thesis is that of higher education transformation. Universities in the UK have been facing unprecedented challenges the last few years. Tuition fees have experienced a dramatic increase, to nearly threefold in 2012, and government funding for tuition has decreased significantly (BBC News, 2011). This has provoked a shift in students' attitudes, who have become more demanding customers, leading universities to the creation of policies where student support, accessibility and transparency have become a priority. The Higher Education sector has commercialised, bringing private companies to contribute with customer satisfaction expertise. Another factor is that of the expansion and internationalisation of UK universities, who have international students and non-residential learners as a significant element of their business models. All these circumstances have forced universities to seek for a balance between offering the best quality, widening access, and optimising costs, as Daniel anticipated (2009). For this, innovative approaches are required, and MOOCs are contributing to it. In this subsection, two important aspects of educational innovation for transformation through MOOCs are discussed here: networked learning and open education.

2.3.1. The role of MOOCs in networked learning
In Section 2.1.3 "The role of competencies in digital education transformation", networked practices were presented as a core element for transformative practices. Since the advent of the Web, society has evolved into a "networked society" (Castells, 1996), where network interactions have intensified in all domains of social activity, including education. Early MOOCs are in fact a manifestation of networked learning principles (Downes, 2008), where connectivism comes to its full fruition as a learning theory. Connectivism is a learning theory whereby the affordances of the Web enable knowledge to reside in networks of people and online resources (Siemens, 2005). The enactment of this theory into connectivist MOOCs is the epitome of networked learning, but networked learning instances can be found in MOOCs other than cMOOCs. For example, MOOCs deemed as instructivist MOOCs, also known as xMOOCs, can contain discussion forums within which networked interactions can take place within the learning community. In fact, these networked interactions can be stimulated with mentor interventions (León, White & White, 2015).

52

It could therefore be argued that any type of MOOC can lead to networked learning experiences, when implemented purposefully. If networked learning is a core element of education transformation, MOOCs of any kind can contribute as transformational agents in that respect. Later on in this thesis, in the findings section, instances of networked learning will be shown and discussed (see subsections 4.2.2 `Online communication', and subsection 4.3.3. `Interacting with the community')

2.3.2. MOOCs and open education
MOOCs are open courses. Their existence can be contextualised in the open education movement, which in turn could be framed within a wider open movement in the Web, including open source and open access (Hylén, 2006). The open movement in higher education has had an impact beyond free access to resources. To a certain extent and in certain domains, it has had an important role in HE transformation, by contributing to the renegotiation of the role of the teacher, the boundaries between formal and informal learning, and the online/face-to-face delivery (Conole & Brown, 2018) The advent of MOOCs can be better understood with the previous existence of Open Educational Resources (OERs). Their origins are situated in a conference hosted by UNESCO in 2002 with the aim of providing education to countries with difficulties accessing proprietary educational content (Smith, 2006). OERs proliferated quickly, but they did not revolutionise higher education as expected, for several reasons: They did not leverage the affordances of web 2.0 technologies. Although many of them had rich interactive elements, such interaction would occur between the resource and the user, and not so much between users using the same resource. Such interaction between learners is one of the fundamental features that learning resources must have in order to be in line with current pedagogical theories such as constructivism (Ulrich et. al., 2008) and connectivism (Siemens, 2005). Downes (2005) noted that Web 2.0 could enable communities practice, and OERs lack the capacity to become part of such communities. Another reason for their limited impact is that they were not based on a substantive body of research about the pedagogical implications of accessing information without any constraints. As Knox suggests, "proponents of OER have focused disproportionately on the removal of barriers to accessing educational content, and studies into the activities and competences of self-direction are needed." (2013, p. 830).

53

Figure 2.8. Evolution of Open Online Education (Yuan & Powell, 2013)

The limitations of OERs presented above provoked the emergence of open education forms that would allow more participation from the learning communities. These new forms of open education are known as MOOCs, which started with connectivism-inspired initiatives in 2008, and were boosted with platform-led courses in 2012 (see figure 2.8 in Yuan & Powell 2013, p.6)

54

2.4. Theoretical framework
This thesis is the product of a combination of studies that have drawn from different learning and socio-technical theories. This section will discuss the philosophical assumptions of this project, followed by the theoretical underpinnings within both the individual studies and the thesis have been framed.

2.4.1. Ontology, epistemology, axiology
All these studies are qualitative. As such, a set of ontological, epistemological and axiological assumptions have been made to explore both the participants and the corpus of journalistic literature in HE specialised magazines from which the findings have been drawn, as recommended in Cresswell et al. (2007). Ontologically, it has been assumed that reality is subjective and highly context dependent. Participants perceived the development of their competencies in many different ways, in many cases with totally different opinions and experiences. This is why the findings will portray such diversity, where different perspectives from participants will be reproduced when discussing the same themes. Epistemologically, a certain degree of closeness between myself (the researcher) and the phenomenon was also assumed. I worked with one subset of the participants (i.e. some of the early career academics in the focus group study), and I had met several other participants in other studies, although I had not worked closely with them. That does not situate me as a complete "insider", although my job as a learning designer for online learning in a higher education institution shares a great deal in common with the practices that the participants performed in their jobs, either as learning developers or as academics involved in MOOCs. I have come across many challenges derived from the transformative nature of the space in which my practice is framed, and I have developed many skills and competencies as a result. I assume this might also be the case for the participants. Drawing from Guba & Lincoln (1988), therefore, the `objective separatedness' between myself and the participants was minimised when carrying out the studies. Also, I adopted an interpretive phenomenological epistemological orientation, discussed in more depth in subsection 4.3 `Epistemological orientation'. This thesis also brings with it many axiological assumptions, as is common in most qualitative studies (Denzin, 1989). That is, I do believe in the value of MOOCs as agents of education transformation, especially in the different ways they can enhance the competencies of those who teach through them. Certain bias can therefore be expected in 55

the value-laden discussions of the findings, derived from both my practice and research, closely related to MOOCs.

2.4.2. Theoretical underpinning
The theoretical approach on which this thesis is based is not the same as the the one used in the studies, although they have several commonalities. This thesis draws on Engelstrom's Activity Theory (1999). The studies draw on Orlikowski's theory of technology in organisations. Both theories have change and transformation as their core element. The main difference is that Orlikowski's focus is the culture in the organisations, whereas Activity Theory spreads the transformation phenomenon in different equally weighted foci, which allows competencies to be drawn on more comfortably, and from a wider range of angles. The following subsection is a brief overview of Orlikowski's theory of technology in organisations, as it deserves certain discussion despite not being the main theoretical framework for this thesis.

2.4.3. Orlikowski's theory of technology in organisations
The main theoretical influence for these studies was that of Orlikowski's work on organisational theory (Orlikowski 2000;2001). This theory is especially relevant to studies 3 and 4 with experienced academics (see table 3.1), as it informed the design of the studies, from their research questions to the way the questions to the participants were formulated. Orlikowski's theory suggests that introducing technological innovations in organisations  in this case, MOOCs in universities  can produce a variety of outcomes with three different levels of transformation. They can maintain the established practices, and even reinforce them, maintaining a `social inertia' in which there is little organisational change. For example, a university `x' introduces MOOCs; academics record their lessons on campus and upload them to the platform, in the same sequence as they do in their on-campus modules; they add multiple choice questions that they have already been using in the on-campus exams. In this hypothetical case, nothing has changed. There hasn't been any innovation in their practice, and the structure of the university also remains the same: there might be some more learners accessing the open content, and perhaps a growth in the recruitment as a result of the marketing effects of the MOOCs, but in essence, the practices and the organisational structure remains the same. In the next level, which Orlikowski names `application' (Orlilowski, 2001) technologies can create new ways of practising the profession. For example, in the case of MOOCs in 56

universities, we could see academics `applying' what they have learned when developing learning materials with MOOCs, bringing it back to their on-campus modules. The third and deepest level of enactment is that of `social change'. That is, structural alterations occur in organisations as a result of the introduction of new technologies. This has been deemed as unlikely to happen so far, mainly due to academics' resistance to change. From an Activity Theory perspective, for example, Blin & Munro (2008) found little evidence to demonstrate significant transformations in the organisational structures of HEIs as a result of technological innovations such as the popularisation of Virtual Learning Environments. . As discussed in this and the previous subsection, Orlikowski's theory of technology in organisations fulfilled the purposes of several of the studies that comprise elements of this thesis. Its institutionally focussed lens was not deemed sufficient to draw a picture in which individuals' development of competencies was sufficiently represented. Activity Theory was therefore adopted to build this thesis as a whole. The following subsections delve into this new theoretical approach.

2.4.4. Activity theory
2.4.4.1. Definition and history
Activity Theory (AT) can be defined as "a conceptual framework based on the idea that activity is primary, that doing precedes thinking, that goals, images, cognitive models, intentions, and abstract notions like "definition" and "determinant" grow out of people doing things" (Morf & Weber, 2000, p.81). The origins of AT can be traced back to a combination of German philosophy (Kant, Hegel, Marks and Engels), evolving into Vygotsky's and Leont'ev's work in the field of Soviet psychology in the early and mid twentieth century (Engeström, 1999). This theoretical approach was developed as an alternative to the contemporary Western behaviourist and psychoanalytical approaches to education. In the 1980s, Activity Theory transcended the Soviet domain to be adopted in the West, with Engeström being one of its first and main proponents (Wilson, 2006). Engeström not only popularised AT in the Western cultural studies domain, but also adapted the model, expanding it from the individual to the collective sphere. The Soviet approach consider subjects, mediational tools, and motivations, as the elements of a given outcome. Engeström added a layer of collective elements, namely rules, community and division of labour (Edwards, 2010).

57

It did not take long for this approach to be applied in other fields of research such as that of human-computer interaction (ibid.), mainly due to the applicability of its key elements, namely motivation, goal, activity, tools object, outcomes, rules, community, and division of labour. The introduction of MOOCs in higher education systems and the effect of this on the development of competencies is a complex phenomenon with diverse stakeholders, tools and motivations that can be mapped into the conceptual framework of Activity Theory, as will be discussed in the subsequent subsections.

2.4.4.2. Activity theory in Technology Enhanced Learning settings
The main argument of this thesis is that learning takes place in professional settings (HEIs) as a result of the introduction of a new technology (MOOCs). Professional development instances can be noticed when professionals  in this case academics  carry out their practices with a new technology. Activity theory has provided a valid framework to study this kind of multi-agent phenomena in workplace settings (Edwards, 2010). For example, Bourke Mentis & O'Neill (2013) used Activity Theory to analyse the reactions of teachers when trained to use a new assessment tool. Activity Theory enabled these researchers to achieve a nuanced understanding of the ways in which teachers were reacting to the tool, taking it further than more simplistic approaches that simply label subjects (teachers in this case) as resistant to change. Another example is the analysis of Murphy & Rodríguez-Manzanares (2008), who delved into the Activity Theory principle of contradictions to guide educational technology research. This principle has to do with the tensions generated between traditional and new practices. It usually takes place when practitioners walk out of their comfort zones when changing from practices to which they are used to, to practices new to them. By delving into this principle, Murphy & Rodríguez-Manzanares (ibid) argue that the process of education transformation can be better understood, especially when it comes to the disparity between the expectations of different stakeholders towards a given artefact, and their actual use by the practitioners, including its outcome. Scanlon and Isroff (2005) successfully adapted Engeström´s Activity Theory model to the use of learning technologies in the higher education domain. Scanlon and Isroff conceptualised the "Tool" element as the learning technologies. The subjects were the students, and the objects were the task or the learning situation. The desired outcome was the enhancement of the students´ learning. The rules were appropriate ethical behaviour. The context was established through the community element, which was conceptualised as

58

the university. Finally, the division of labour element was an identification of who holds the control, that is, who is able to decide in each domain (what tool is chosen, what tasks are allocated, what kind of assessments are set, etc.). Figure 2.9 represents Scanlon´s & Isroff´s adaptation to Activity Theory for the use of learning technologies in higher education contexts.

Figure 2.9. Adaptation of AT for learning technologies ( Scanlon & Isroff, 2005)

Some limitations have also been suggested in the application of Activity Theory in professional settings. For example, Yamagata & Lynch (2007) recognised that the results of a study such as this thesis, which involves different actors and interactions, are highly context specific; so much so that the interaction triangle used to represent AT may not be able fully to reflect the interactions occurring in such specific contexts.

59

2.4.4.3. Activity Theory and this thesis
As mentioned in the previous section, this thesis has been conceptualised within the Activity Theory theoretical framework. The definitions of the different elements of Activity Theory were adapted for the purposes of this study. Many of the elements coincide with those of other adaptations of this theory, but some others have not been previously considered in the same way in related studies. For example, Scanlon and Isroff´s concepts of community and tools (2005) coincide with those of this thesis, represented in figure 2.10. The subject, the object, and the outcomes, however, are different actors to those of Scanlon and Issroff.

Figure 2.10. Adaptation of AT for this thesis

Each of the elements of the adaptation of AT for this thesis are described below:  Tool: The `Tool' element is conceptualised here as MOOCs. This conceptualisation was established after considering MOOCs as tools for experimentation in education innovation. This consideration was achieved after a systematic review of journalistic accounts of the role of MOOCs in HEIs (León, White & White, 2015). That study concluded that the role of MOOCs in HEIs started mainly as reputation enhancers, evolving towards testing grounds for education innovation, especially in terms of online distance education, and blended learning approaches within the campus.  Subject: The `subjects' in this conceptualisation are academics with teaching responsibilities. The participants of this study are academics, and the findings are 60

based on their views, their perspectives, and their insights around the introduction of MOOCs in their practices. The allocation of academics as subjects was decided based on the research gaps identified in literature reviews such as that of Liyanagunawardena, Adams & Williams (2013), Haggard et al. (2013), and Yousef et al. (2014), discussed in more detail in subsection 2.2.2. `Published MOOC Literature Reviews'.  Object: Under this adaptation of the AT framework, the object is transformative practice. This conceptualisation is based on Hoban's perspective of CPD for education transformation (Hoban, 2002). For Hoban, professional development can, and should, be used as a means for transformation in education. By participating in the production of MOOCs, academics achieve an object, namely transformational practices. Rather than planned in formal Continuous Professional Development programmes, this object is achieved informally through new interactions as a result of new `divisions of labour'. That in turn results in the acquisition of competencies through informal means, which Myers (2015) refers to as "vicarious learning", a term coined by Bandura (1962) to refer to this informal learning process.  Outcome: By using MOOCs as tools, academics come across new challenges, which provide opportunities to achieve new digital capabilities, as well as new teaching competencies. Repeated occurrences of this process can contribute to an incremental cascading of competencies within the community  in this case HEIs  which can lead to a collective preparedness to address the transformational demands that higher education faces.  Rules: `Rules' are conceptualised here as the use of digital technologies to support learning in HEIs. This conceptualisation is perhaps the most distant to other conceptualisations of rules in adaptations of AT for Higher Education and Learning Technologies, and it merits a longer discussion than for the elements above. The reason for this allocation is that, after a systematic review of the education strategies of Russell Group universities (see subsection 2.2.4.3 `Online Distance Education in the UK HE: the current picture' and Appendix 3 'Russell Group Online Learning Strategies'), it was observed that many universities were implementing procedures by which the use of learning technologies was encouraged, if not prescribed.

61

A representative example is that of the UCL, which has established a "Blended Learning Baseline" (UCL, 2016), setting out the minimum expectations for the use of e-learning technologies in all modules and programmes across the institution. Other universities have also developed policies for Online Distance Learning, such as the University of Edinburgh (2015). This policy establishes a tight alignment between the quality standards applied to the Online Distance modules and those of the rest of the university's modules. This university also states an aspiration for all educators to become digital educators, aiming to get them CMALT certified. (CMALT is the Certified Membership of the Association for Learning Technology. Consultancy reports such as that of PwC (2015) corroborate this tendency. This report states that universities in the UK must be aware that digital transformation in the universities transcends the IT departments, and affects every activity within the institution. It also recommends to link all digital activity to the institutions´ strategies, and invest in communities around willing and capable digital innovators. It can be safely assumed, therefore, that harnessing digital technologies has become a `rule' that should be abided.  Community: In Activity Theory, Community stands for all the different actors and groups of actors in the system to be studied. In the case of this thesis, the community has been conceptualised as the staff in higher education institutions, both academic and support staff. The `community' element should be differentiated to that of `subjects'. Subjects are those from whom the perspectives are studied; but these subjects operate in a wider context, in a community that comprises other groups such as students, senior decision makers and support staff.  Division of labour: Another important element of this adaptation to Activity Theory is that of division of labour. The introduction of MOOCs in universities has brought a set of consequences in the roles of academics and support staff such as learning designers and media producers. Several explorations have been carried out into the relationship between MOOCs, educators and support staff (Bayne & Ross, 2014; Najafi et al. 2015), and these have tended to an appreciation from academics of the opportunities resulting from collaboration with learning designers. A deeper exploration of the influence of MOOCs in the division of labour phenomenon was carried out by White & White (2016). Drawing on a combination of the Socio-Technical Interaction Networks theory (Kling, McKim & King, 2003) and

62

Whitchurch's concept of the `third space activity in HEIs (2008), White and White mapped the roles, duties and responsibilities of a number of universities in relation to the production of MOOCs, represented in figure 2.11. As the figure shows, learning designers act as hubs in MOOC development.

63

Figure 2.11: Socio-Technical Interaction Network of MOOCs in HEIs (White & White, 2016)

In this mapping, the study found that academics perceive a reduction of their influence on how MOOCs are structured and presented, in comparison to the influence they can exert on on-campus modules. This study also points out that the mapping shown in figure 2.11 is just a snapshot in a specific setting at a specific time, and that the division of labour evolves quickly as a result both of the influence of core actors (learning designers, educators) and that of peripheral actors (especially the management steering group). As mentioned above, the division of labour element is particularly relevant to this thesis because duties and responsibilities are closely tied with the competencies needed to carry out new tasks, and the competencies developed as a result of carrying out such tasks.

64

3. Methodology
3.1. Introduction
This chapter is a detailed description of the ensemble of methods that were used in the studies that form this thesis. The chapter contains the following subsections:      Firstly, the research questions are introduced, together with a discussion on how and why they were formulated. Secondly, the epistemological orientation of the project is described. This section states the validity of the insights gathered with this qualitative methodology. Thirdly, a comprehensive description of the data collection processes for this thesis is provided. The fourth subsection explains how this data was analysed, with an emphasis on the Template Analysis method for qualitative data analysis. Finally, the limitations of this methodology are discussed.

3.2. Research questions
As stated in the first chapter, this thesis has been developed in different stages, each of which was considered as a study in its own right. All these studies had several common elements, however: MOOCs were the topic of study, academics were the subjects, HEIs were the environments, and most importantly, there was an implicit, overarching question: "How does producing and delivering MOOCs enhance HE academics' competencies in digital and online environments?" The above question is wide. The studies contained more specific questions, in response to the demands of the projects, and the research interests of the parties who collaborated in them. For example, study 1 (desk study) and study 3 (HE academics with teaching experience) placed a certain emphasis on the relationship between academics and their institution. Studies 2, 4 and 5 placed more emphasis on professional development and digital/online teaching skills. For the purpose of this thesis, all questions from all studies were synthesised into a new set of research questions. The starting point of this synthetisation was the Activity Theory theoretical foundations of the thesis. The process will be described in the next subsection. The resulting set of research questions is as follows:

65



Q1 What competencies do academics develop as a result of their involvement in the production and delivery of MOOCs?   How do these competencies contribute to transformation in digital practice? How does the massiveness and openness of MOOCs influence their teaching practices, both online and on-campus?



Q2 How do academics respond to the digital transformation demands of HEIs as a result of being involved in MOOCs?  What kinds of operational and workload concerns arise for academics involved in MOOCs, in relation to wider online/digital learning tasks?  What kinds of new work dynamics and relationships arise when academics are involved in MOOCs and other forms of digital/online learning?



Q3 What opportunities can MOOCs bring to HEIs for a digitally competent workforce?  How can the teaching quality of HEIs benefit from the adoption of MOOCs in their portfolio?  How can the digital preparedness of HEIs benefit from the adoption of MOOCs in their portfolio?

3.3. Epistemological orientation
Epistemologically, I assumed a certain closeness with the phenomena that I was observing. I adopted an interpretive phenomenological approach to provide an account of the findings. This subsection explains this approach with detail. This thesis is composed of studies in which a variety of methods were used to gather and analyse the data (see figure 3.1): focus groups, interviews and document analysis data collection instruments have been used to gather a corpus of data that was analysed through content analysis in some instances, and thematic template analysis in other instances. All these methods have a common epistemological approach: the findings have been jointly constructed by the participants and myself, the researcher, through guided conversation. Far from the positivist approach of a disengaged observer, these findings have been presented as my own interpretation of the phenomena that have been discussed with the participants. My own experience as a practitioner in MOOCs and educational development has been 66

taken into account, and an conscious effort has been made to minimise bias and preconceptions throughout all the studies of this thesis, as recommended in Hatch (2002). The approach adopted could be labelled as Interpretive Phenomenological Analysis (IPA), which is commonly used in educational settings (Smith, 2004) Steward & Shamdasani (2014) discuss two major epistemological approaches to conducting qualitative research. These two approaches could be placed in a continuum with two extremes. At one extreme there is the social constructivist approach, at the other extreme there is the interpretive phenomenological approach. Social constructivism is often used in focus groups, since it draws the attention to the different ways in which groups construct the meanings within the topic of discussion. The main account of the reality does not come from the actual statements of the participants, but from how participants have negotiated and achieved the meaning of what they are discussing. Another factor that defines reality is the context in which the conversation is taking place. In this regard, the responses to the research questions posed by the researcher do not emerge from the individuals, but from the narrative that has been collectively constructed in a specific setting, either in a group conversation, or in a dyadic conversation between an interviewer and an interviewee. Although social constructivism does not represent the entirety of the epistemological approach adopted in this thesis, certain elements of it were used to make sense of the narratives that groups of participants were constructing. Two of the five studies that constitute this thesis involved participants set in groups. A study with early career academics  more details will be provided later on in this section  involved focus groups. As it turned out, the focus of attention there was not the co-construction of meanings by the groups, since responses were isolated and largely associated to individuals. Nonetheless, it was inevitable that certain constructions of meanings could be perceived and documented, as many negotiations took place in the sessions. The data collection tool of another of the studies, referred to from now on as the `world cafe' study  the method of which will also be discussed later on in the section  also had many elements of social constructivism. Participants had to work in groups to provide a negotiated answer to the questions posed. The individuals were assigned roles in the group so that each of the answers were forcibly co-constructed. Also, the researcher had an important role in co-constructing the narratives and their meanings, not only by eliciting them but also by negotiating what the final version of the story would look like.

67

At the other extreme of the Stewart & Shamdasani's (2014) proposed epistemological continuum there is the above-mentioned IPA, which is described in more detail in the next subsection.

3.3.1. IPA in this thesis
IPA could be described as the "systematic exploration of personal experience" (Tomkins, 2017). This thesis is the result of the systematic exploration of my personal experience with MOOCs, while observing how working with this tool stimulates abilities that academics at all levels had not developed to their full potential.

3.4. Rationale
3.4.1. A modular triangulation approach
The research project leading to this thesis was carried out using a modular approach. That is, the project was undertaken in five different stages: a desk study, a focus group study with early career academics, a one-day event with professionals and academics involved in MOOCs in a HEI, a set of interviews with experienced academics, and a set of interviews with expert educationalists. Most of these stages constituted stand-alone modules that have been published in a variety of journals and conference proceedings, detailed in the "relevant publications" section of this thesis. Only the last of these modules has not been published yet; that is, the interviews with expert educationalists. Although these modules were stand-alone, the findings of each of them informed the interview questions of the following. For example, findings in interviews with experienced academics revealed that a wide variety of competencies were developed. This variety led to the decision to use established frameworks such as the UKPSF and Jisc frameworks so as to cover it. The findings from the second, third and fourth study were combined with the findings of the desk study, to create the final template for this thesis. The variety of methods with which the data was obtained led to a triangulation process that allowed the themes discussed from different dimensions to be captured. Figure 3.1 illustrates this triangulation process.

68

Figure 3.1 Triangulation process for the data analysis of this thesis

3.5. Data collection
3.5.1. Participants
As specified in the introduction, the aim of the whole project was to understand the usefulness of MOOCs from the academics' perspective. Participants with different degrees of expertise were investigated in the different studies. These were grouped into early career academics, experienced academics (mainly lecturers and professors), and experts in educational development. Table 3.1 summarises the numbers of participants in each of the studies that comprise this thesis:

Table 3.1. Studies of this thesis

Study 1: Desk study 2: Early academics

Description Analysis of journalistic articles Focus groups with PhD students working as mentors in MOOCs.

No. of participants 0 19

69

3: World cafe

Academics and learning technology professionals in a UK university, brought together in a one-day event One-to-one interviews with lecturers and professors (and two teaching assistants) in a Spanish university One-to-one interviews with high-profile experts in education technologies in HE

34

4: Experienced academics

10

5: Experts

8

3.5.1.1. Participants vs subjects
The participants were also the subjects of study, although in the fourth study the participants were asked to talk about others, as well as about themselves.

3.5.1.2. Study 1: desk study
The desk study had no participants. Most of the data was collected from specialist journalists' accounts about the MOOC phenomenon in HEIs globally, especially in the UK, the US and Australia. The main source of articles were the Times Higher Education magazine, the Chronicle of Higher Education and Inside Higher Education. These three magazines have a vast number of articles about MOOCs, and the information contained in them was considered to be a way to access to access fresh, current and topical stories around the MOOC phenomenon.

3.5.1.3. Study 2: early career academics
There were nineteen participants in this second study. They were early career academics, all PhD students within three different disciplines: Web Science, Archaeology and Oceanography. All of them participated in the capacity of MOOC facilitators. The participants were divided into four groups of four to six members, following the advice of Krueger & Kasey (2009), who suggest that groups of around five participants are ideal for fostering comfort and confidence. This is especially the case when participants are highly familiar with the discussion topic. Four sessions were considered sufficient, in line with Morgan's suggestion (1997) that three to six interviews are an acceptable range. Exceeding this number of iterations would most likely have led to data saturation, as very few new ideas were emerging in the last session, and many of them were already familiar to the researcher after the three previous sessions. 70

Table 3.2 outlines the four groups of participants, with short descriptions of their profiles and their motivations for participating in MOOC production and delivery:
Table 3.2. Participant profiles in study with ECAs

Gr. 1

N. 1

Profile PhD student in Web Science. Background in philosophy. Has never taught before in any setting. Interested in mentoring for research purposes rather than pursuing a teaching career. Mentored the Web Science MOOC mainly because he wrote part of the academic content of that course. Mentored the Web Science MOOC mainly because he wrote part of the academic content of that course (on e-democracy), and wanted to know how learners react to it.

2

PhD student in Web Science. Former engineer and IT teacher in secondary schools. The most experienced teacher in this groups of early career academics. PhD student in Web Science. From Saudi Arabia. Has some HE teaching experience back in their country of origin as a junior teaching assistant. PhD student in Web Science. Has a background in law. Has recent HE teaching experience as a junior demonstrator. Mentored the Web Science MOOC mainly because he wrote part of the academic content of that course, and wanted to know how learners react to it.

3

4

5

PhD student in Web Science. From Syria. Has some teaching experience in a university of their country of origin. PhD student in Web Science. Just finished a degree in Psychology. Little teaching experience, has worked as a demonstrator. Mentored the Web Science MOOC.

2

1

2

PhD student in Web Science. Just finished a degree in psychology. No teaching experience. Mentored the Web Science MOOC.

3

PhD student in Web Science. Background in Computer Science. Averse to social constructivism, much keener on behaviourist approaches. No teaching 71

experience, but fair awareness in different pedagogical approaches. Mentored the Web Science MOOC mainly because he wrote part of the academic content of that course (on cyber security and botnets), and wanted to know how learners react to it. 4 PhD student in Web Science. Background in Computer Science. Mentored the Web Science MOOC mainly because he wrote part of the academic content of that course (on cryptocurrencies and cyber crime), and wanted to know how learners react to it. No teaching experience

3

1

PhD student in Archaeology. Mentored in the Portus and Ancient Rome MOOC. Translated the whole course into Italian. Interested in bringing her research topic to large audiences, especially in Italy. No teaching experience. PhD student in Archaeology. Mentored in the Portus and Ancient Rome MOOC. One year of HE teaching experience as a teaching fellow. Interested in the MOOC for teaching innovation. PhD student in Archaeology. Mentored in the Portus and Ancient Rome MOOC. Little teaching experience as a demonstrator. Contributed to the MOOC content. Interested in how learners engage with her content. PhD student in Archaeology. Mentored in the Portus and Ancient Rome MOOC. No teaching experience. Did so because she was after teaching experience. PhD student in Archaeology. Mentored in the Portus and Ancient Rome MOOC. Reasonable teaching experience, three years as a teaching assistant/teaching fellow. Highly interested in networked learning and learning technologies. PhD student in Oceanography. No teaching experience. Interested in participating in the MOOC for outreach and research dissemination purposes. Same as above PhD student in Oceanography. No teaching experience. Interested in participating in the MOOC for outreach and research dissemination purposes. Aiming to pursue an academic career with teaching duties. MOOC for interacting with learners. PhD student in Oceanography. No teaching experience. Interested in participating in the MOOC for outreach and research dissemination purposes.

2

3

4

5

4

1

2 3

4

72

5

Same as above

3.5.1.4. Study 3: World Cafe: a combination of professionals and academics
In this study, 34 staff members with different levels of seniority were involved in a one-day facilitated event. Most of the staff members were academics who were involved in the production of MOOCs, but there were also librarians, learning designers, administrators, marketing officers, members from the legal services of the university, and a partnership manager from the MOOC platform in which the courses were hosted. The following table breaks down the roles of these participants, and how many there were:

73

3.5.1.4.0.2. Table 3.3. Participants breakdown in the World Cafe study

Institutional role Professors Lecturers Lecturers Learning designers Learning designers Librarians Multimedia producers Legal services

Role in the MOOC programme Lead educators (lead MOOC content production) Lead educators (lead MOOC content production) Secondary educators (contribute to content) Exclusively dedicated to the MOOC programme Partially dedicated to the MOOC programme (in charge of one, or two MOOCs) Exclusively dedicated to the MOOC programme, in charge of asset management Partially dedicated to the MOOC programme Partially dedicated to the MOOC programme, in charge of contracts with external providers such as the platform and copyright management Platform partnership manager. They attended the event representing the platform Teaching fellows and researchers involved in delivering the MOOCs Partially dedicated to the MOOC programme, in charge of the marketing operations.

Number 5 3 9 2 3 1 2 2

Platform representative MOOC mentors Marketing officer

1 5 1

3.5.1.5. Study 4: academics involved in MOOCs
The participants of this study were academics in a Spanish university. I collaborated with this institution in two MOOC-related research projects. The interviews were carried out in that institution during a research visit. Most of the academics were professors who led the content production of the courses. They were all highly interested in the MOOC phenomenon and eager to participate in the study. They were also very keen to share their experience as to how they developed new competencies as a result of their involvement in MOOCs. Table 3.4 provides a brief description of their profiles.

Table 3.4. Participant profiles of the study with experienced academics

Participant

Profile

74

1

Professor in Law with over 40 years of experience in Higher Education. Recently involved in a project of law and food security, and they developed a MOOC in that topic for dissemination purposes. New to online teaching but has become an enthusiast of online learning after doing the MOOC, especially when comparing it to on-campus teaching. Lecturer in Law, involved in the same MOOC as above. With little prior experience in online and blended learning has pursued the online learning delivery further, developing SPOCs. Senior lecturer in Civil Law. Experienced in the use of learning technologies and blended learning, especially through VLEs. Has got her own website, and is active in social media for education purposes. Lead educator in a Civil Law MOOC, and enthusiastic about the MOOC movement. Professor in Organic Chemistry. Has been championing online learning in their department for over ten years, obtaining numerous funds for several learning innovation projects. Has developed two MOOCs on the topic in an independent manner. Has got a well-equipped recording studio in their office. Uses learning analytics to improve their online tuition. Recent PhD graduate in Psychology. Works as a learning technologist supporting the MOOC programme. Has been engaging with academics to produce MOOCs for about two years. Enthusiastic about the potential of MOOCs to transform education. Reports having developed teaching competencies by supporting MOOC production. PhD candidate in Modern History working as a teaching assistant. No previous experience in online learning, and self-reports having few digital literacies. Recognises having become much more digitally competent as a result of her involvement in a MOOC on Spanish literature of the renaissance. Senior Lecturer in Law, involved in the food security MOOC mentioned in respect to participant 1. With vast experience in online and blended learning, they run a semi-online Masters programme in city planning. Enthusiastic user of Moodle, they see more networked learning opportunities in traditional VLEs than in MOOCs. Lecturer in Law. Has contributed to a MOOC in administrative law. They have some experience in the use of VLEs for blended learning, and are interested in increasing the online elements in their modules. They report that MOOCs have not been an eye opener, although they recognise they have learned about educational video and instructional design. Professor in Philosophy. Has led the development of an organ transplantation ethics MOOC. Joined the MOOC programme out of curiosity, gaining a positive experience although not interested in pursuing it further. They got what they wanted from the MOOC: finding out about public opinions on the organ

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

75

transplantation topic. Does not believe in the potential of MOOCs for learning innovation in their specific field, although recognises it may work in other contexts. 10 Professor in Modern History. Lead educator on a MOOC about El Quijote. Little experience in online learning before MOOCs, beyond a few teleconference sessions and setting up forums and chats in Moodle. MOOCs have changed their understanding of online learning, so much so that they have replaced the instructional design of the online learning elements in their on-campus module.

76

3.5.1.7. Study 5: expert educationalists
The last study for this thesis was conducted with expert educationalists as participants. Table 3.5 outlines their profiles.
Table 3.5. Participant profiles of the study with expert educationalists

Participant 1

Profile Participant 1 (P1) has over 25 years of instructional/learning design experience. They are currently a senior lecturer in education technology, and run a Master's degree programme in this area. They have been involved in the MOOC movement since the very start, before 2010, pioneering the creation of these courses in the UK. P1 is an advocate of the open movement, and an enthusiast about the networked learning potential of MOOCs. P2 is a highly recognised learning developer in the UK, author of highly influential books in the area of education technologies. They have led the development of an important digital competency framework in Higher Education, used worldwide. Currently working as a director of an institute on learning technologies and innovation in a UK university. P3 is another recognised learning developer, co-author of an influential European competencies framework. P3 is one of the main proponents of the digital badges movement, and an advocate of the affordances of the digital technologies for the formal recognition of informal and lifelong learning. P4 is a senior lecturer of learning technologies in a UK university. P4 is a former co-chair of the Association of Learning Technologists (Alt) and and author of a few books about online learning. P4 specialises in online tutoring, having developed widely-used handbooks for this purpose. P5 leads the online learning programme of a Belgian university. P5 has a broad e-learning consultancy background, and was charged to implement the MOOC programme in his institution. P5 specialises in online curriculum design and instructional design, and does not consider themself an academic, but a senior learning technology professional. P6 works in an Italian University, as an online courses designer. P6 led the development of a European MOOC platform, in which the emphasis was multilingual and multicultural education. With over 30 years of experience in educational technologies, P6 advises European universities on how to implement MOOCs in their portfolio. P7 is a senior lecturer, and the academic lead of the learning analytics department of an important Australian university. With a background in educational psychology, P7 has developed widely recognised MOOCs about higher education teaching practice.

2

3

4

5

6

7

77

8

P8 is a professor, and the director of the ICT competence centre of a renowned Portuguese university. P8 has a long history of training teachers in the use of learning technologies.

3.5.2. Data collection instruments
3.5.2.1. Focus group interviews
It should be noted that the author of this thesis trained and line managed these facilitators, mainly for practical reasons. At the time of the interviews, back in 2014, it was difficult to find MOOC facilitators, as this role was relatively new. Another reason was that participants in the different focus groups had worked together in teams, and the researcher was keen to investigate how they interacted with one another to perform their mentoring tasks. This is not always considered advisable, as Agar and McDonald argue (1995) that too many assumptions are made and too many statements are taken for granted when participants are known to one another, which could impoverish the quantity and quality of the data resulting from their conversations. Also, as mentioned at the start of this subsection, the researcher was known to the participants, in the capacity of their line manager. That could lead to the risks associated with the so-called `observer's paradox' (Labov, 1972) whereby participants, especially when set in groups, can tilt their responses towards what they perceive the observer wants to hear, diminishing their objectivity, and increasing their bias. All these potential hindrances were taken into consideration, mainly by avoiding invasive interventions during the sessions. It was still decided to proceed in this way, however, and in fact, the insider status of the

researcher was considered an advantage because, as other authors report, groups
where participants are known to each other can help the researcher elicit more sophisticated accounts of the topics being discussed in the conversation, since the environment is easier to control (Monaham & Fisher, 2010). Practical reasons had more weight in the decision made, as "where differences in group dynamics are not an issue, practical concerns

may govern the choice between strangers and acquaintances" (Morgan, 1997:10). 3.5.2.2. World Cafe
A full-day event was organised in the our university, the second part of which was the World Cafe event. The first part was open to all staff and had the purpose of showcasing the progress made with MOOCs within the institution, and included an invited talk by the
78

CEO of the partnering MOOC platform. In the second part, all members of staff involved in MOOC production and implementation were invited. A total of 34 members of staff attended, including the core project team, academics, learning designers, mentors, media producers, librarians, members from the legal services team, administrators and a representative from the partnering MOOC platform. The data was collected through World Cafe (Aldred, 2009), an instrument for data collection aimed at gathering perspectives of large groups of participants in organisations in a reduced amount of time. This method aims to give voice to as many participants as possible, and it is often used to gather insights of all members of staff on matters concerning an organisational change, process, approach or new technology. The incorporation of MOOCs as an educational technological innovation can therefore be considered a suitable topic of enquiry with the World Cafe approach. In this method, all participants attend a facilitated event, in which a pleasant environment away from the work routine needs to be set up. In the i1 case, this was a hospitality facility within the University, where refreshments and lunch were provided. In an iterative process, participants were divided into small groups on tables led by a host, of around 5 to 8, where they were invited to discuss a theme, prompted by a question. They were encouraged to share their thoughts by writing on flipcharts. When the question changed, the groups were redistributed to different tables. In i1 there were four iterations of this process. The questions were formulated with the intention of both extracting as many insights as possible from the participants, and at the same time shedding light on the research questions. These were the following:
 What do you think has gone well with the MOOCs at our institution? What are we proud of? What has changed in your practice as a result of your involvement in MOOCs?   What challenges have we faced? What did not work well? What did we miss? From what we know and what we've learned this morning, how can we, as a group, capitalise on the opportunities that MOOCs offer? What would you and/or i1 do differently?  What would be a first or next step for MOOCs at our institution- both for you, and /or the wider programme? What would you say the three key priorities should be?

79

The outputs of the participants, in the form of anonymised sentences and drawings represented in flipcharts, were transcribed into one document, which was treated as a list of themes in response to the formulated questions. These themes are discussed in more details in subsection 4.5.3, titled "the template".

3.5.2.3. One-to-one interviews
Eleven short (some 15 minutes) semi-structured interviews were conducted in i2. The participants in the interviews were staff directly involved in MOOC production and delivery: four professors, four lecturers, two PhD students working as teaching assistants, and an instructional designer. The academics were from varied disciplines, namely philosophy, computer science, chemistry, literature and law. The questions were the same as those asked in the first stage in i1. The interviews were recorded and transcribed. The transcripts of these interviews were then analysed against the template created in stage 1. The analysis was carried out by researchers from both i1 and i2.

3.5.3. Ethical considerations
This thesis is composed of studies that involve human participants, except for the first desk study. Two of the studies involving participants were conducted in compliance with the ethical research governance guidelines of the University of Southampton (ERGO). Ethical approval was sought and obtained for each of these studies through the statutory process set up by the university. This process uses a submission tool called ERGO 2, which assigns unique IDs to the submissions. These IDs were 13380 for the study with early career academics, and 27342.A1 for the study with expert educationalists. The permissions for the study with experienced academics were obtained from the Spanish university where it was conducted, using their own processes. The universities where the studies were conducted had similar requirements to grant ethical clearance. The main criteria were:     Participants must be handed an information sheet, and must sign an informed consent form, to be safely kept by the researcher. Identifiable personal data must be anonymised. A Data Protection Plan must be in place. Participants must be treated respectfully, and must feel comfortable during the whole period of their participation. 80

3.6. Data analysis
3.6.1. Template analysis
The same method was used for analysing the output of all the conversations with participants: the focus groups with ECAs, the interviews with academics, and the interviews with expert educationalists. This method is the so-called Template Analysis (TA). Cassell (2008) defines Template Analysis as "a structured technique for analysing qualitative data that enables researchers to place some order on their data from the start of the analytic process" (Cassell, 2008:221). This is a popular qualitative data analysis in a wide range of contexts, especially in education. In fact, the increase in the popularity of TA in educational contexts has been noted (King, 2012). TA is commonly applied to text transcribed from interviews, focus groups and other qualitative data collection instruments. The text is analysed against a set of themes that form a "template", hence its name. The template can be organised in a variety of structures, including lists of themes and hierarchical models. The themes that form the template become codes. These codes are used as pointers to search instances within the text that match the themes. When the the text corpora to be analysed are too large to be managed manually, qualitative data analysis software such as NVivo and ATLAS.ti is used as an aid to search and record instances against the codes (Lewis, 2004). The template is usually constructed in an iterative process. Firstly, the themes of a coarse template are usually pre-defined after a background analysis, such as a literature review. Then, an initial exploration of the data reshapes the template, with a finer granularity. Once this template is designed, the researcher conducts a deeper analysis of the text, searching for instances that match the themes and sub-themes established in the template. The template can be refined after a further iteration, during the exploration of the data. The number of iterations of this process depends on the epistemological orientation of the project (Waring & Wainwright, 2008). That is, the researcher can decide whether or not to modify the template as new themes emerge during the analysis. This flexibility is determined by the distance set between the researcher and the phenomenon. If the researcher is a distant observer of the phenomenon, less flexibility is usually allowed to modify the template during the analysis. If the researcher is placed close to the phenomenon, for example as a 81

participant of it, more freedom is usually allowed to modify the template as further iterations of the analysis are conducted.

3.6.2. Rationale for Template Analysis
TA was the chosen method for the analysis of data obtained from the interaction with participants since it provided the flexibility needed for this multimodular project. Ever since I started engaging with participants, I had the intention to classify their interventions in previously established sets of coarse themes, while still allowing myself the chance to discover emerging sub-themes as I delved deeper into the data. I achieved this by following King´s recommendation that "the essence of template analysis is that the researcher produces a list of codes (`template') representing themes identified in their textual data. Some of these will usually be defined a priori, but they will be modified and added to as the researcher reads and interprets the texts" (King, 2012 p. 426). Another reason why I chose TA was that it affords different configurations in the distribution of themes, or codes. It also encourages the finding of relationships between such codes, and describing such relationships. I considered that as an important feature due to the Activity Theory framework that I was using, since the relationships between its different elements are as important as the elements themselves. Before choosing TA, I considered other approaches, but they had certain limitations. One of these was Content Analysis, as I had already used this in the analysis of published journalistic texts for my MSc dissertation, as well as in the first stage of the PhD study (see White et al., 2014; León, White & White, 2015). Content Analysis places too much of an emphasis on the quantity of occurrences of a theme in the text. This frequency of occurrences often determines the conclusions achieved after the analysis. On the contrary, thematic analysis (including TA) "pays greater attention to the qualitative aspects of the material analysed" (Joffe & Yardley, 2004).

3.6.3. The template
The template was developed to address some of the research questions directly, and some other research questions indirectly. That is, all the themes in the template were extracted from the conversations with participants to address the first block of research questions (Q1). The second and third blocks of research questions (Q2 and Q3) were addressed as a result of the interpretations made from a combination of the conversations with participants, my background research and my professional experience.

82

For reference, the research questions are repeated below:  Q1 What competencies do academics develop as a result of their involvement in the production and delivery of MOOCs?  How do these competencies contribute to the transformation of digital practice?  How does the massiveness and openness of MOOCs influence their teaching practices, both online and on-campus?  Q2 How do academics respond to the digital transformation demands of HEIs as a result of their involvement in MOOCs?  What kinds of operational and workload concerns arise for academics involved in MOOCs, in relation to wider online/digital learning tasks?  What kinds of new work dynamics and relationships arise when academics are involved in MOOCs and other forms of digital/online learning?  Q3 What opportunities can MOOCs bring to HEIs for a digitally competent workforce?  How can the teaching quality of HEIs benefit from the adoption of MOOCs in their portfolio?  How can the digital preparedness of HEIs benefit from the adoption of MOOCs in their portfolio? Most of the questions of the first block (Q1), are addressed directly in the template, since they involve the competencies of the subjects. This is the reason why the core element at the top-level of the template is named `transformational competencies'. That is, the whole template revolves around the competencies that academics (`subjects' in the Activity Theory model adapted for this thesis, from now on called the `AT model') develop to become digitally competent (`object' in the AT model) and thence to achieve in turn educational transformation (outcome in the AT model). Figure 4.2 is a graphical representation of the template:

83

Figure 4.2: Template for this thesis

Rather than reproducing a single established theoretical competencies model, the branching at the middle level was designed as bespoke to the scope of this thesis, with influences from Weller's (2011) Transformative Practices model discussed in subsection 2.1.3, and the widely used three-dimensional division of competencies (Westera, 2001), namely cognitive, social and functional competencies. This is why the template at this level was divided into digital competencies, responding to the digital competencies frameworks that influenced the interview questions; attitudes and values, responding to the social dimension of most competency frameworks; and teaching competencies, responding to the UKPSF teaching competencies framework that also influenced the interview questions. The low-level branching of the template was decided in a similar process. One of the lowlevel themes, or sub-themes, directly address elements of the AT, namely `interacting with the community' under the `attitudes and values' branch. The remaining sub-themes were chosen in view of their relevance in the conversations with the participants. The following subsections discuss each of the mid-level themes further.

3.6.3.1. The Digital Competencies theme
The `Digital Competencies' theme comprises the `ICT proficiency', `Online Communication' and `Digital Literacies' sub-themes because these were considered to be the main conversation topics that emerged in the interviews.

84



The `ICT proficiency' name of this sub-theme has been adopted from the Jisc Digital Capabilities framework (Jisc, 2018), where it is described as "The confident adoption of new devices, applications, software and services and the capacity to stay up to date with ICT as it evolves. The capacity to deal with problems and failures of ICT when they occur, and to design and implement ICT solutions." (p.2). A similar description is provided in the Jisc Digital Literacies framework (Jisc, 2014) under the "ICT literacy" branch of the framework, described as "Adopt, adapt, and use digital devices, applications and services" (p.1). The instances of this sub-theme are therefore accounts from participants regarding the enhancement of their abilities to operate ICTs. As will be shown in the findings, most of these ICTs are related to audiovisual production, as very few instances of any other aspect of ICT skills occured in the sessions.



`Online communication' is a prominent sub-theme in this template. Competencies for online communication can be developed during the delivery stage of a MOOC, when interacting with the learning communities. These competencies are important in a wide variety of professional settings in the digital economy, and deserve special attention. All digital competencies frameworks place emphasis on online communication, providing extensive definitions and sub-categorisations of this aspect (Jisc, 2014; Jisc, 2018; HEA, 2017; European Commission, 2018). In this template, two main aspects of online communication were considered: digital identity management and communication in social media. Digital identity management is an important aspect of online communication for academics, as their online self-representation is becoming as important as the way they self-represent offline (Laurent, 2015). The effective management of a personal online presence has become fundamental to successful academic practice, and MOOCs often make this evident to academics. Finding the balance between disseminating content and maintaining privacy is often a challenge that requires competencies for it, as reflected in most digital competency frameworks. For example, both Jisc Digital Capabilities framework and DigiComp (2018) name it `digital wellbeing' (Jisc, 2018). Another important skill for academics when communicating online is harnessing the power of social media to maximise dissemination practices (Mewburn, 2013). Activities such as blogging, tweeting, slide sharing and participation in academic 85

networks powered by social media tools such as Academia.edu, ResearchGate and Mendeley require competencies that can also be honed by participating in the production and delivery of MOOCs.  `Information literacy' was selected for this template since it is relevant to the production of MOOCs. When producing and delivering MOOCs, academics usually tread around the boundaries of of open and closed content, as well as the copyright and sharing licenses (Bernstein, 2014). The Jisc and DigiComp frameworks include other specific digital literacies such as data literacy and media literacy, but these were discarded since they fell beyond the scope of the conversations with the participants, as well as the research questions.

3.6.3.2. The Values and Attitudes theme
The middle branch of at the middle level of the template, namely `Values and Attitudes', was included at the same level as the other two branches  digital competencies and teaching competencies  because they were considered equally specific to both types of competencies. This is also why its sub-themes, `Attention to learning communities', `Drive for Innovation', `Interaction with the Community' refer equally to both digital and teaching competencies. Another reason why `Values and Attitudes' was included as one of the three core themes is that most definitions of competencies take into account this social dimension, together with cognitive and practical dimensions. Specific competency frameworks such as the UKPSF (HEA, 2011) also include this savoir-être as a core dimension to describe competencies and good practice. Within this theme, three sub-themes were established, taking into consideration the scope of this thesis: attention to diverse communities, drive for innovation, and interaction with the community.  `Drive for innovation' was included on the understanding that it is an important factor for education transformation, the `object' element of the Activity Theory model for this thesis. As stated by Jisc (2014), "Strategies and policies will guide direction but change happens `on the ground' through `change agents' working to support staff and students in developing their skills and practice." (p.9) This sub-theme, therefore, contains instances in which participants state their motivations for innovation, and how they contribute to a bottom-up change culture within their organisations. 86



`Attention to diverse learning communities' was another selected sub-theme for two particular reasons. First, because this aspect is highlighted in the competencies frameworks for teachers presented in this thesis, such as the UKPSF (HEA, 2014), Zabalza's (2004) and Perrenaud's (2004). Second, because MOOCs expose teachers to highly diverse learning communities, with varied cultures, knowledge, cognitive levels and approaches to learning. This can provide opportunities to raise awareness of the diversity of learning communities beyond the enrolled students in the classroom.

3.6.3.3. The Teaching Competencies theme
The Teaching Competencies theme was included to represent one of the main hypotheses in this thesis: that by teaching with MOOCs, academics can rethink the way they teach in the classroom. Again, three sub-themes were selected among a large number of common descriptors from teaching competency frameworks. This selection also responds to the number of instances in the conversations with participants, and the relevance to the research questions.  `Designing learning' is a common descriptor in the practice dimension of teaching competency frameworks. The UKPSF (HEA, 2011) describes it as "Design and plan learning activities and/or programmes of study", although another UKPSF practice descriptor was included in this sub-theme, namely "Develop effective learning environments and approaches to student support and guidance". Under this sub-theme, there will be instances of teachers who have made adjustments to the way they design their modules, or the way they plan their lessons, as a result of what they have learned when participating in the design of a MOOC.  The `Subject & pedagogical knowledge' sub-theme encompasses all descriptors of the knowledge dimension of teaching competency frameworks such as the UKPSF. The reason for this significant merging is the relative lack of relevant instances in the interviews, despite being prompted by the interview questions. In fact, many of the instances were negative, that is, experienced participants tended to deny subject specific or pedagogical knowledge when developing MOOCs.  `Assessment and feedback' are two sub-themes in one. It encompasses to the abilities relating to delivering assessment feedback to students, as well as the feedback that practitioners obtain from students.

87

3.6.4. Beyond the template
The second set of research questions (Q2, Q3) are more related to the `object' and the `outcome' elements of the AT model. The answers to these questions are not directly extracted from the findings, but from the combination of my experience, background research and conversations with participants, as stated at the start of this section. The three-dimensional structure was also used in the templates of those studies for this thesis that involved participants, namely the focus groups with early career academics (León, Fielding & White, 2016), and the interviews with experienced academics involved in MOOCs (León, Cobos, Dickens & White, 2018), as explained further in the subsections below.

3.6.4.1. Template for the focus group study with early career academics
This template was created through an iterative process. That is, a first list of themes was used to craft the prompts for conversation in the focus group sessions. These themes were divided into two blocks, namely "effects" and "implications". The "effects" block was related to how participants' experiences as MOOC mentors had an effect on their competencies to teach in online and digitally enhanced environments. Initially, subthemes under this block were related to skills development, both digital skills and teaching skills. After a first superficial analysis, however, the sub-themes of this block were reorganised as confidence, skills and knowledge, as can be seen in figure 4.3. This reorganisation of the themes responded to the predominance of conversations related to the confidence gained when interacting online with learners. It should be remembered that most of the participants in these focus groups were PhD students with little teaching experience. Another theme, "knowledge" emerged from the conversations, since there were many instances in which participants declared having acquired further topic knowledge. The "implications" block could also have been named as "challenges". This block had to do with the challenges encountered when teaching online, especially in relation to participants' exposure to high numbers of learners whom they did not know. Again, after a first superficial analysis of the data, two more sub-themes were added to the block, mostly related to their working relationships with the employer, as well as among themselves as a team.

88

Figure 4.3. Template of focus groups with ECAs

89

3.6.4.3. Template of interviews with experienced academics
The template for the study with experienced academics was designed to obtain insights about how they perceived the influence of MOOCs in three different dimensions, at an increasing level of abstraction. The first dimension was the influence of MOOCs on themselves as individuals, or subjects in the Activity Theory scheme. The second dimension consisted of the influence on their institution as a community, again within the AT scheme. The third, and most abstract dimension, was the influence on higher education as a whole. The third dimension was especially important because I wanted to gather a wide a variety of perspectives on the big picture of MOOCs in Higher Education, from those who practice it and thus are in regular contact with students.

Figure 4.4. Template of interviews with experienced academics

3.7. Methodological limitations
The inherent limitations of qualitative research can be contested by the epistemological orientation with which the studies of this thesis were conducted. For example, the findings in each study are specific to each of the contexts in which they were obtained. They may not, therefore, be reproducible to other contexts, both in space and in time. While this lack of reproducibility is a hindrance from a positivist perspective, it is not from a constructivist perspective. Indeed, as Kvale suggests (1995), the validity of a

90

research study can be socially constructed, with a combined input from both the researcher and the participants. This social constructionist perspective also tackles the problem of the lack of precision of the instruments with which the phenomenon is measured. In fact, no objective measurements were made when analysing the transcripts of the interviews, simply because counting specific instances of a theme was not going to provide a reliable account of the realities of their contexts. There was one limitation that was present even within the constructivist paradigm, however. That is, the research was conducted over a span of five years, and this is a long period for the views of the researcher to remain the same, especially when a long and steep learning curve occurs in the course of a PhD study. Interpretive phenomenological approaches are able to transcend time when the phenomenon evolves, but they may may loose internal reliability when the researchers' views evolve as well. This becomes especially relevant when reading the publications of the studies integrated in this thesis, some of them published a few years ago, and this thesis itself, written a few years later. The same studies may therefore contain certain differences in the interpretations, depending on whether they are read in the published papers or in this thesis.

91

4. Findings
A large body of qualitative data has been obtained and analysed. Lengthy conversations have been held with over 35 participants, and 34 more have provided their insights in a oneday event. Also, over 100 journalistic articles were analysed in study 1. This chapter synthesises the analysis of this large and rich corpus of data. The insights and opinions gathered here have more commonalities than differences, perhaps due the profiles of the participants, all of whom were interested in MOOCs. Nonetheless, a rich diversity of responses was found, sometimes with opposing views as to how MOOCs affect academics' competencies to transform higher education.

4.1. Presentation of the findings
This section presents the findings obtained through the the conversations with participants (studies 2, 4, and 5), following the structure of the template proposed for this thesis (see subsection 3.6.3, "The template", in Chapter 3). The presentation of the results contains many short excerpts from the interviews and focus group sessions that were carried out. The transcripts of all these sessions are contained in the appendix named "Transcripts". In order to make these excerpts easily searchable within the context of the transcripts, each excerpt contains a label, the structure of which is presented in the table below:
Table 4.1. Structure of the excerpt codes.

Study number S2: Focus groups with early career academics S4: Interviews with experienced academics S5: Interviews with expert educationalists

Participant number P1...Pn P1...Pn P1...Pn

For example, an excerpt from the first participant (P1) participant in the study with experienced academics (S2) will be labelled as S2P1. It should be noted that the S2 transcripts were originally in Spanish, but the excerpts presented in this section have been translated into English. Here I should point out that I was the translator, and I did not notice any risk of confusion between what was expressed in Spanish and what was translated in into English.

92

4.2. Digital competencies
The first block of this template is about digital competencies. Over the course of my involvement with MOOCs, ever since I started, I perceived that MOOCs stimulated the curiosity for digital education of academics involved. I generally noticed an intensification of the interactions of these academics with digital tools. The extract below, from a professor in philosophy, is a representation of this intensification: "I have taught in virtual learning environments before, using different platforms, but since I am with MOOCs, my experience with online teaching, and digital learning tools in general, has multiplied! What is more, I recently see myself talking about digital learning much more, I´m more interested." (S4P9) This perception was constructed over innumerable interactions I had with academics of various disciplines such as medicine, applied linguistics, English literature, computer sciences and law, as part of my learning designer role. These findings respond to the intention I had when I designed the interviews: rather than whether, I aimed at finding out to what extent, how and what kind of digital competencies were enhanced when teaching through MOOCs. This subsection will address three aspects of digital competencies: ICT proficiency, online communication, and information literacy in digital contexts.

4.2.1. ICT proficiency
Proficiency in Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) sits at the core of the Jisc framework of digital capabilities. These are functional skills that consist of the ability to use devices and software confidently. This core section of the Jisc framework also mentions "the capacity to deal with problems and failures of ICT when they occur, and to design and implement ICT solutions" (Jisc, 2018). This capacity to deal with problems and failures of ICT was mentioned by an expert educationalist, who called it "resilience". In the extract below, this education developer explains that a core ICT competency is being able to solve problems in challenging situations, rather than simply mastering the use of specific tools: "That usually gets translated into something like resilience, so they need resilience at many scales. They need resilience at the trivial scale like you and I experienced at the beginning of this call, you know, I mean there's a lot of people that just fall apart when they go like "oh my god I'll use Hangouts or nothing", so they need some resilience. They need also to manage their own expectations that said they need to have some comfort and familiarity with how their operating platform works and what it's capable of doing, so that they know when something is misbehaving or when it's actually not." (S5P1, senior lecturer in education technology) Although it is true in a wide variety of digital education contexts, the context of the extract above was the inclusion of MOOCs in the teaching practices of academics. The

93

conversation was around the use of synchronous tele-conferencing tools for online distance learning, which are often novel to the everyday practices of academics. Another set of ICTs that are often new to academics are audiovisual technologies. Developing learning materials with these technologies is often a challenge that requires the information to be presented in ways that academics are not used to in their everyday practices. In the extract below, another expert educational developer mentions video as a format to which many academics are exposed for the first time when developing MOOCs. This participant reckons that video is the most common novel technology that leads academics to rethink their practices, as shown in the extract below: "Video, mostly video. But not only using the cameras, the audio, the lighting (which they do despite someone else being in charge of the technical aspects). Also sharing videos, embedding them, putting them in the Web. And also they get a sense of how the video should look, how the scene should be set up, what is its optimal length depending on the audience, etc. For some this is quite a significant experience. Being recorded opens a new world of use of technologies in so many different ways!" (S5P5, Senior Educational developer) The statement above was made in a context where academics are the `talents' in the audiovisual product. That is a setting in which academics only need to talk to a camera and audio recording equipment that has usually been set up by support staff such as audio/video producers or learning technologists. In the interviews, however, there were also instances in which academics declared having learned how to operate these devices, usually thanks to the current user-friendly video recording and production tools embedded in computers and smart devices, such as mobile phones and tablets. The extract below belongs to a conversation in which a lecturer reports having learned how to record and share ad-hoc videos as review content for the MOOC they developed: "I don't think my everyday teaching is going to change much, but there is something remarkable that I have learned, which is talking in front of a camera. And not only that. I have also learned how to record my own videos with a reasonable standard for a lessthan-an amateur, mainly thanks to what I learned in the recording set, and to the advice I got from the support staff. They gave me great pieces of advice on how to record my own videos with just the the computer and a decent webcam and microphone. They showed me how to frame myself, how to get reasonable lighting and audio with the very simple tools I had available. I even learned basic post-production techniques (mainly top-andtailing, adding captions, etc.), and what format to use to export it to Youtube. I didn't know it was so easy, with in-built tools that any computer has! I have recorded and uploaded some videos by myself. They are not core content, they are just some additional comments and feedback, but still I am very satisfied with the result!" (S4P9, Professor in Philosophy) 94

The testimony above reports having learned how to produce and share videos for ancillary learning materials with decent quality standards for educational purposes. There was another participant who took this further, however. With a set of funding that they received, a Professor in Chemistry bought a semi-professional video recording studio that they set up in their office. This professor trained themselves to produce high quality videos for the further editions of their Chemistry MOOC. In the extract below, this professor explains how they ended up using such professional audiovisual equipment: "Well, the truth is that it has been quite a while since I started using learning technologies, with this ADA project that I have just mentioned. Mainly, what I have done differently is upgrading my equipment, and adapting it to its use within the Internet. With the ADA project, we are talking about quite a few years ago, when this technology did not exist. All I had available was an overhead projector, that I still keep here [points at an old overhead projector]. Everything that I had within my reach, I utilised. Look, here at my right I have a liquid crystal screen in which I can display molecular models. This screen is nearly 30 years old, and now I can achieve the same with an application on my computer. I have always been quite keen on technology. And now I have these two 4k TV cameras, all these microphones and these studio lights. I bought this with an innovation grant I received. This equipment is quite complex to use, so I attended a few video production courses to learn how to use this. My first "movies" were the videos for the Organic Chemistry MOOC." (S4P4, Professor in organic chemistry) In the focus groups with Early Career Academics, there were very few instances in which participants reported having acquired or enhanced ICT skills. There were several reasons for this. First, the development of ICT skills was not included in the interview questions, since the scope of the discussions was more oriented to their teaching skills. Also, the tasks they performed only required participating in forums and social media with tools with which all participants were highly familiar.

4.2.2. Online communication
The development of online communication skills was a recurrent topic in the interviews with all three categories of participants. Rather than spontaneous, this recurrence is mainly due to the design of the interview questions, and the emphasis that I placed on this topic during the sessions. I placed this emphasis because I consider MOOCs as digital communication tools, the good use of which requires a set of digital competencies. As discussed in 2.1.6 `Digital Competencies', these digital communication competencies are reflected in most digital skills and literacies frameworks, such as both Jisc frameworks of digital literacies (2014) and digital capabilities (2018), the Digital Lens on the UKPSF (2017), and the European Commission's Digital Competence Framework (2017). Many participants stated that, while communicating in front of a camera was generally the most important skill that they developed during the production stage of a MOOC, 95

communicating in social media and the Web was the top skill developed during the delivery stage. The main means of teacher-learner communication in computer-mediated communication is text. In the extract below, an expert educational developer notes the need for teachers to enhance their written communication skills in settings where the affordances for spoken interactions are limited or nonexistent: Well, MOOCs require teachers to develop a wide range of skills, if we want to do them well, both when they are trainers and trainees online. Communication skills, being able to express yourself only with writing - have in mind that video exists now, but when I began, not that much - and the fact that we have to support others, give constant good feedback to help learners and keep them engaged in those courses. So it helps to develop all these kinds of soft skills (S5P8) Textual skills were also a recurrent theme in the conversations with Early Career Academics (ECAs). They came across large numbers of comments, and they perceived having gained the necessary agility to read and address them quickly and reliably: "to be able to read the information very quickly, instead of starting and reading it word for word, you start scanning your way through, and then you pick up something very very quickly, six or seven in a row for example" (S2F1P2) "- R. So do you think there is a difference in your quick reading skills between before and after you started? - P3. Huge! (S2F1P3)" In that respect, many of the ECA participants also stated having honed their summarising skills, recognising that reaching diverse audiences online requires being succinct: "And that's one thing I've found...I gave a talk at a research group meeting earlier and even from communicating my science to particularly non-scientists it....forces you to say things in as few words as possible..." (S2F4P2) In fact, one of these participants was able to point to specific instances in which verbosity was not rewarded in online communication contexts such as the discussion forums where they were operating: "I agree with that. I have also found that the longer that my comments would tend to be, fewer "likes" I would get. That made me a bit sad. Some would ask and I would answer, and many would not even get back to me."(S2F2P2) There were several occasions in which ECAs recognised having acquired summarising skills thanks to the restrictions imposed in specific spaces of the MOOC platform where they were working. In the extract below, a participant explains how being forced to keep within a character limit worked to their own benefit, since they learned how to compress the information that they were trying to convey:

96

"I think one thing that I found it improved over time as I was doing the facilitation was fitting my responses in the comment boxes. Basically, I found that the Futurelearn comment box was quite short and some of the questions that people were asking were incredibly broad; they wanted to get a nice answer, sort of thing. So I tried to learn to compress all this information. I think it helped in that sense, definitely." (S2F2P3) The summarising skills gained by facilitating in MOOCs transcend to other academic domains, as the following participant states: "For me, having done the MOOC twice now, it does provide you with a means of being able to summarise your work in a much more effective and succinct manner" (S2F4P2)

4.2.3. Information literacy
Perhaps one of the most important skills required in environments where digital transformation is taking place is that of managing digital content. As should be expected, all of the participants in these studies had long experience in managing digital learning materials, as an intrinsic element of their everyday practice. At the very least, all participants were confident users of the VLEs in their universities, regardless of their age and academic discipline. For example, there was a professor in law in his last year before retirement, who had been uploading their teaching materials and managing his lessons and students through the VLE for nearly 20 years: "I have carried out a bit of online teaching in the past, in a Telecom Law masters. That postgrad degree was mixed, where students came from different places, as we were more than one institution organising it. I have been managing the VLE for quite a while. I think we started in the early 2000s! I used it mainly to share materials, most of them cases for my students to read. I also managed the forums, the questions in them, and some activities around it. I would share materials with students that I had already seen in person; they were all subscribed. I could see how they could take advantage of the flexibility and convenience of having everything in the VLE, although at times there were certain inconvenients too. For example, many students were expecting to have the materials available in paper too, so there was a bit of duplication of work at times. I was not too worried about sharing those materials, I never worried too much about copyright issues, I thought it was just like using a digital version of what I used to do before. However, with MOOCs the thing changed. I was aware that I had to be a bit more careful, as I was sharing materials with lots of unknown people. I had quite a few discussions about it, about licensing and related issues. I realised this was quite a different way of sharing content, and thought had to be put into it!" (S4P1) From the account above, it can be inferred that, as a result of their involvement in a MOOC, the participant enhanced their skills for managing, curating, organising and sharing digital content for learning, teaching and assessment. An increase in their knowledge about the copyright rules can also be appreciated, especially as a result of discussions with the wider team supporting the MOOC production. That was also the case with less experienced academics. In the extract below, an ECA explains how they learned about their authoring rights in digital contexts: 97

"I met so many institutions that I have never heard of, and it shows that you can move beyond the classroom and design or facilitate content online, so it is about innovative teaching methods, which is quite exciting and quite good for your career purposes as well. I also was able to gauge the value of my input, and that of others. I mean, I authored a few learning resources for this MOOC, and also authored a great deal of comments. I was asked to sign copyright release forms, and was explained what was meant in these forms. Now I have a much better idea of what my rights are as an author in all these digital contexts, including MOOCs, which I thought once you put your stuff in a MOOC you have no rights on it, but apparently it is not the case!" (S2F1P4) There were many other instances in which discussions about the implications of sharing materials online within MOOC contexts occured. In the World Cafe event, the topic of digital resources licencing was one of the most recurrent ones. Most of the conversations touched on the theme of whether certain resources should be shared, and under which conditions they should be shared. In that event, there were many instances in which academics invoked knowledge recently acquired, either by having asked copyright experts  mainly learning designers and asset managers from the MOOC production team  or by having consulted specific documentation, especially the Creative Commons information sites. The theme of information literacy was also touched upon in the interviews with expert educationalists. An interesting sub-topic was that of contributing to pools of knowledge in open educational environments. In the following extract, one of these experts explains how teachers who were taking a MOOC about teaching in digital environments  a MOOC developed and delivered by the interview participant  had to think about the implications of sharing content in digitally open environments: "...so I'll give you a couple of examples: so for, example, one of the activities that always worked really really well on the early online courses and MOOCs that we ran was building an annotated reading list as a group, so this idea was of everyone from whatever background are pooling what they know already, and using that as an introductory icebreaker. And that has, designing that activity to suit a diverse audience continues to have benefits in all of the online courses that we run. So, I think that thinking about a very diverse audience has been really important for designing activities that help people to understand the open world that they're living in, such as activities to create a Wikipedia entry. for example. So we're all living in this age where openness is an important feature of it, and you have to engage in that to truly understand it. So you have to contribute to the knowledge pool that is available in the online world, such as through Wikipedia, in order to really understand it." (S5P2)

98

4.3. Values and attitudes
4.3.1. Attention to diverse learning communities
Attention to learners' diversity is an important descriptor in most teaching competencies frameworks, and the interview questions were designed to address this topic. As a result, many participants provided rich accounts about how producing and delivering MOOCs led them to contemplate this issue from new perspectives. In the extract below, a early career academic reflects upon the fact of interacting with massive and diverse learning communities. This is an example of many conversations in which participants perceived that having wide and diverse audiences was a highly stimulating educational experience: "I think with the exposure to arguments and things like that, I think, because of the nature of the MOOCs, in a lot of cases, you can be teaching to thousands of people rather than just teaching, let us say, to a lecture room full of people, you get all sorts of different responses and different debates and discussions about things that you would not get in the classroom, even in the most diverse lecture hall. You probably would not get the same scale and scope of responses as what you get online, so I think that does help." (S2F2P3) In the extract below, a senior educational developer uses a metaphor to state that an important quality of a good teacher is the ability to address diverse learning communities in terms of cognitive capabilities. By the end of their intervention, the participant explains how MOOCs can help harness this diversity attention ability. That one is interesting. I met a researcher who used a metaphor that I love: He said that he has met many teachers that try to recall the learner experience. So how was your time at the university and stuff. And the guy would tell them, ok but how many students were in your class? The teacher would say well, some 300 sometimes. And this researcher asked the teacher: do you think you are the best representation of the general population? Have in mind that you may well have been in the top 5% of a class of 300. And on many occasions, teachers have never thought about that. It is clear that they are not the best example of an average learner, they are successful, but they should not be a model. I think that addressing a MOOC reminds that in great measure. Reminds that there are various audience, and reminds the fact that they need to catch them all. (S5P5, senior educational developer) In fact, expert educational developers showed an inclination to discuss the positive aspects of having diverse learning communities extensively. In the extract below, one of these experts introduces the concept of knowledge pools, whereby there is an activity in which learners contribute with annotations. This not only helps engage and empower a large part of the learning community, but it also enriches the course:

99

"...one example is one of the activities that always worked really well on the early online courses and MOOCs that we ran, was building an annotated reading list as a group. So this idea was of everyone from whatever background pooling what they know already, and using that as an introductory icebreaker. And that has, designing that activity to suit diverse audiences, continues to have benefits in all of the online courses that we run. So I think that thinking about a very diverse audience has been really important for designing activities that help people understand the open world that they're living in, such as activities to create a Wikipedia entry, for example. So we're all living in this age where openness is an important feature of it, and you have to engage in that to truly understand it. You have to contribute to the knowledge pool that is available in the online world, such as through Wikipedia, in order to really understand it. So, you know our online courses will now include that kind of activity, it's not the kind of thing you're looking for exactly." (S5P2) Certain disappointment around the richness and variety of contributions from learning communities was also observed. In several interviews, there was a recurrent theme of a gradual loss of sophistication in the comments which learners would contribute: "I started to lose interest in the comments of the participants. While at the first run of the course there were many of all sorts, in the subsequent runs there were predominantly introductions sort of `Hello my name is... I am from ...'. At its best, there were some saying `thank you, that is interesting'. That was a bit disappointing, and I really thought about what we could do to spark more interesting conversations. We don't know why, but I think it is because there were many more participants in the first run, more participants making comments, so it was easier to find interesting ones." (S4P10, senior lecturer in Modern History) The above account was not the only one. There were more in which some disillusionment was evident regarding the ability of MOOC learning communities to contribute to substantial creation of knowledge. It must be noted, however, that this was only the case study with participants who were using a platform that did not have social learning as a marked pedagogical underpinning. The participants who were using a more social learning oriented platform seemed to have a different experience, in which the interactions with the learners had an array of challenges, but these did not include a lack of depth in the discussions.

4.3.2. Drive for innovation
In the conversations held with the participants, there were many instances in which the theme of innovation was addressed. Drawing from these discussions about innovation, it could be inferred that the involvement in MOOCs sparked a willingness to try new approaches to teaching. For example, participants provided new ideas and suggestions as to how certain features of MOOCs could be harnessed within the institution. These suggestions came especially from Early Career Academics, who were generally more spontaneous than the rest of the participants in terms of providing suggestions for experimental teaching. In the extract below, a participant of the focus groups study discusses how the flexibility of MOOCs could be harnessed in on-campus modules. 100

"I always see that it should be combined with off-line learning, so I see that the negatives come from offline teaching when you wonder why the lecturer did not record that lesson for me to watch it when I am in a good mood. Some people would learn better in the morning, some in the evening... But it should be combined with live discussion, part of the interaction could be offline. I can think of meet ups where the learners come to know each other. And I think it should be in the start or in the end." (S2F1P5)

4.3.3. Interacting with the community
In the Activity Theory framework adaptation for this thesis, higher education institutions are communities in which members interact around the introduction of new tools. The participants of this study were members of those communities, and they reported that they interacted in new ways as a result of the introduction of MOOCs. When adopting new technologies and approaches to teaching, such as MOOCs, contextual factors such as the strategies in the universities and the trends within the institutions can be significant. In the early adoption phase of introducing new technologies there are occasions in which there is little interest in engaging with this kind of imposed innovation. In the interviews, there were cases reported in which there was no interest in developing MOOCs from the teaching staff, despite the fact that there was substantial budget allocation for this venture. The extract below is an indirect account of an education developer who was charged with developing MOOCs in liaison with academics: "...I bid with a colleague for money from the pro vice-chancellor to develop MOOCs from *****, and we got money and we really really really tried hard to work with the faculties to devise and run for MOOCS. We only ever got one off the ground and we gave the money back to the PVC it was too difficult to engage academics. R. Was it like herding cats? P2. Yeah it was not... the reasons where we fell down, and we wrote an evaluation report, and stuff which I'm happy to share with you, were very practical issues about budgets, and finances, and where was the time going to come from. So we had some academics and some faculties were keen that we should come to do things strategically but they couldn't work out how to incorporate this into workload planning " (S5P2, expert in online education development) As the interviewee states above, there were practical issues that were precluding academics from engaging in the production of MOOCs, despite their willingness to do so. A very important issue seems to be incorporating the time for producing MOOCs in their working time. This theme was recurrent in the interviews with academics, who provided direct accounts of how they felt about the allocation of duties for developing MOOCs: "There is a need for more support from the institution. I worked on this course intensively for several months. This task should be recognised, and rewarded with an alleviation of teaching hours at the very least" (S4P10)

101

"The institution has to take into account that the effort in a MOOCs is similar to the effort in our face-to-face lectures" (S4P4) From the statements above, it could be inferred that the introduction of new teaching approaches such as MOOCs demands a commitment from the whole community, i.e. members of the university at all levels of responsibility. They demand fluid internal communication, empathy and understanding of what is really involved in terms of workload. As well as being demanding, MOOCs can also offer insights into online learning and innovation. In the extract below, an expert educational developer observed that trainee teachers tend to learn by doing, especially when it comes to processes and procedures specific to organisations. In this context, involvement in MOOCs offered valuable experiences from which trainees could benefit. This is what I think about MOOCs and online learning. It is important, sometimes but I have some doubts when it is based on very practical procedures, if it is easy, I am sure that for some people it is not so obvious, so easy, to learn procedures. By procedures I mean how things are done in an organisation. I am sure that for some of the trainees it is not that easy to learn those skills online. It is important that someone close to them helps them learn them, because they are very practical, very contextual, and it is very difficult to learn them from distance, both physical and cultural (S5P8)

4.4. Teaching competencies
4.4.1. Designing learning
Lesson planning is an important element of teachers' competencies. Planning beyond the lesson, be it a unit, a module or a programme, are responsibilities that increase with experience and the duties allocated to teachers. One of the expert educators pointed out that MOOCs can prove to be useful and meaningful test-beds for teachers to take planning further than they are used to. This can in turn become useful in helping teachers at the early stages of their careers to experiment with holistic approaches to planning: I think there is some change in that respect. Without MOOCs, you have to plan your programmes very well, your lessons, your syllabi, your learning outcomes, etc. But with MOOCs, you have to think very hard and program everything, develop all the materials very carefully, predict the interactions with the learners, etc. So it helps trainee teachers to have things very clear in their mind, so then they can make a good plan. They have to develop the planning much more, compared to attendance-based face-to-face classes. (S5P8) This is not only applicable to novice teachers, but also to experienced ones. In the following excerpt, another expert participant explains how online courses, and especially MOOCs, force practitioners to engage in transformative practices, moving towards learner-centred approaches, and careful planning of activities for collaborative learning: 102

"yes so actually the one I'd like to highlight is activity design, and I don't know if this is to do with MOOCs particularly but it is certainly to do with online courses. When you teach online you have to be a lot more explicit about what your activity design is, in advance, than you do in a classroom. So in a classroom you can still wing it. If you're a skilled experienced teacher you can go into a class not really knowing what you're going to do and you can just respond to the group's needs, and you can decide what to do. In an online course you have to plan it all out in advance, and your activity design is more explicit. Your activity design is also much more learner centred. So in a classroom it's very much, I'm afraid, still about what you do as a teacher. But when you're designing an online course, you have to think about what will the learner be doing in this situation, otherwise it doesn't work. So your activity design has to be more learner-centred. Activity designs that work in online courses tend to have some kind of product so something that this particularly collaborative learning activities, so something that the students are working on so they tend to be more activity orientated anyway." (S5P2)

4.4.2. Knowledge
A common indicator of competency reflected in teaching competency frameworks is that of subject knowledge. Discussions with the participants suggest that MOOCs can have a positive influence in that respect, especially with Early Career Academics. On several occasions, ECAs stated that mentoring in MOOCs helped both to consolidate their topic knowledge, but also to give them confidence by showing that they had broader knowledge than they initially thought: "I thought it was quite nice when you knew the answer...for me because I changed fields slightly when coming to my PhD so I always feel like I don't know anything compared to everyone else...so it was quite nice to know that I did know stuff, and that I could share it..." (S1P18, PhD student in Oceanography) "You initially may think you are not fit to facilitate on this topic or anything like that and you realise I do know much stuff. That kind of proves that to yourself." (S1P4, PhD student in Web Science) Accounts from experienced lecturers and expert educationalists were more varied than those from ECAs. When asked whether MOOCs have had any role in their core knowledge of the topics they were teaching, some of these participants stated that there was no influence in any way on academics' knowledge. For example, a learning developer stated that: "No, I do not have any recollection of any academic ever telling me that they have learned new things about their area of expertise. I think the main reason is that, in our university, those who are selected to produce a MOOC are senior academics. And I have talked about it with them, they all tell me that the content they provide is known by their students in the earliest years of their degrees." (S5P7) The above extract states it very clearly: there is hardly any new knowledge acquired by academics when developing MOOCs. Not everyone had the same opinion, however. In the extract below, another expert educationalists states how subject knowledge is gained by discussing the content with other teachers and learning designers: 103

"OK, so MOOCs and online courses tend to be produced as as a team and so I think having to work with other specialists to decide what to teach and how to teach it does extend your disciplinary knowledge ... they have to share it back with the other subject experts and we don't do that very much when we're teaching face-to-face but in an online course you do share your subject expertise and discuss the content of the course with other teachers" (S5P2).

4.4.3. Assessment and feedback
Judging from the accounts of some participants, it was found that MOOCs provided opportunities to experiment with innovative assessment approaches. On some occasions, these approaches were evaluated and, after realising that these did not meet expectations, they were changed. For example, a participant explained how the team realised that a peerreview assessment in a course was not working, and decided to move the assessment to a forum-based approach: "Innovative and varied. One layer, more superficial, is Matching, MCQs, True or False, etc. What is interesting is the second, deeper layer. It is usually peer assessment. There was a time that peer review was not working because many people waited for their review forever, so we decided to do it in groups and forums, where people talk to each other. And then we use external tools. For example in histology we use a tool called cytomin, which is a virtual microscope where you can have annotation layers and all this kind of stuff. We show a tissue, we provide the tool, and we ask a question. They put the answer on the layer, and then it is evaluated by other people." (S5P5) There were also instances with opposite views, in which participants showed some scepticism as to whether MOOCs were equipping academics with innovative forms of assessment. For example, a learning development consultant stated that most MOOCs were simply reproducing old forms of assessment, not only not innovating but also causing a retrogression in the progress that had already been made in terms of assessment innovation: "I think the negative things I see again and again are what I call a disease: the use of multiple choice questions. This has nothing to do with assessment. This is the representation of the inability of teachers to assess. For example, we have this French philosopher who wrote a book called "The trees of knowledge". And the idea of this book was that people would be able to create their own 'coat of arms' where they would describe their interests, competencies, etc. and they did that on paper. They could draw a chart, they would put it on the wall, and discuss it. And then someone decided to use technology to do it. This tool, which was just a tool for mindmapping, in comparison to the use of pen and paper where people could think about themselves, reflect about themselves, to learn about others, to recognise others, suddenly the digital tool could be used by HR management in order to manage people [...] So technology can add an entropic effect to pedagogy, but they have the potential to destroy pedagogy." (S5P3). There is also feedback that can be obtained from learners in online courses, which can be help academics' competencies to develop. In the following extract, a participant states that

104

online learners provide honest, unfiltered feedback that can be more difficult to obtain in face-to-face settings: I think probably what they take back is a greater empathy with being a learner and better understanding of how the course fits into the learners' lives, and other things that they're doing. So when you work with people online they tend to share stuff about what's going on in other parts of their lives, they tend to talk more openly about how things are, providing honest, unfiltered feedback "this module fits in with this module", "this activity is clashing or complementing something else", etc. You don't necessarily get that in a faceto-face class, so I think this kind of empathy and a better understanding of the students' perspective and the students' needs comes through quite well. (S5P2)

105

5. Discussion
This chapter contains a discussion based on the insights generated from the findings reported in the previous chapter (Chapter 5: Findings), in combination with the literature presented in the background chapter (Chapter 2: Background and Literature Review). In the first section, a narrative of the impact of MOOCs within the scope of this research is described. Secondly, a detailed discussion is provided on how staff respond to the digital transformation forces in HEIs. The third section rounds up the discussion with an account of the challenges and opportunities for a competent workforce. The fourth section is a justification of how this thesis has attempted to transcend contextual differences such as disciplines, pedagogical approaches and university strategies.

5.1. A transformative cycle
In light of the findings generated from both the interviews and the literature review, a cyclical model is suggested as a common narrative about the role of MOOCs in helping staff to prepare for educational transformation within universities. 1. HEIs are driven towards a digital transformation. 2. Academics are required to adapt their competencies to new digital environments. 3. MOOCs have come into the HE scene as new education technologies. 4. Many academics have become involved in the production of MOOCs 5. Many academics have intensified their use of technology-enhanced learning approaches 6. Many academics have adapted their practice to digitally-enhanced environments 7. Competencies are cascaded across the institution 8. Digital education transformation in HEIs is facilitated This cycle is graphically represented in figure 5.1:

106

Figure 5.1: Interpreted cycle of MOOCs influence in HEIs transformation

This narrative is presented in a cyclical fashion on the understanding that the driving forces for digital transformation in HEIs are not only external. That is, the societal demands for a more accessible, flexible and networked education do not provoke change on their own. At its best, these external pressures can generate tension, but not transformation. Only a combination of these external forces and the internal push from competent staff can generate sufficient momentum for transformation to occur. Under the lens of this thesis, MOOCs can be a contributory element to this transformation. The following subsections are more detailed descriptions of each of the elements of this cycle.

5.1.1. HEIs are driven towards a digital transformation.
In the introductory chapters of this thesis (chapters 1 and 2) it has been suggested that universities are organisations that are relatively sensitive to digital transformation forces (PwC, 2015; Eggers & Bellman, 2015). Much of this transformation has to do with the advent of the Web (Windschitl, 1998), placing different forms of online learning at the core of this phenomenon (Picciano, Seaman & Allen, 2010). The conversations with the participants corroborate this tendency. There was a generalised understanding that those were the rule of the game: `we have to use all these new digital technologies, we have to play the game with these new rules, and much of this happens online'. Participants rarely questioned that their practice required these new tools. Indeed, while some of the most experienced educationalists would point out that we are not making 107

a big difference by teaching with these new tools, but still, the use of new tools was hardly contested. This fits in with the adaptation of the Activity Theory framework for this thesis, which places the use of digital technologies as rules. These rules are co-constructed between the observed acceptance attitudes internally, and the external pressures of the digital economy.

5.1.2. Digital competencies requirements.
The idea that the use of digital technologies is a rule entails that academics are required to be competent in such use. What Beetham and Sharpe (2007) and Weller (2011) advise as good transformational practice is starting to become a requirement, judging from policies such as those reflected in some strategic documents (UCL, 2016; University of Edinburgh, 2015) discussed in Section 2.4.4.3. `Activity Theory and This Thesis'. These policies require academics to use certain digital technologies to meet good practice standards. As found through the interviews, developing MOOCs was not usually a requirement for the academic participants. They did not have a wide choice of digital tools to develop or deliver their materials, however. The content management system, for example, had to be the one provided by the platform where the MOOC would be hosted. The videos had to be recorded to such a standard that only multimedia production teams could set up the filming sessions. The communication tools (forums and other social media) were those chosen by the platform providers and the learning design teams. In short, academics had to adapt their teaching to the tools they were provided with. This adaptation process can be considered to result in a further process of competency acquisition, especially in the competent use of digital technologies. Whether these competencies are all leading to transformation is a different issue. In fact, the participants had divided opinions on this: some thought that teaching with these new tools would equip them to teach differently, and some others thought that they would teach in the same way but with different tools. There were even some who suggested that these tools were actually causing a retrogression in teaching practice.

5.1.3. MOOCs have come into the HE scene as new education technologies.
The fact that the irruption of MOOCs has captured the attention of a large proportion of the HE academic sector in the UK is undeniable (Daniel, 2012). The fact that they have still not revolutionised HE is also undeniable (Webster, 2018), although they can be considered as

108

contributing agents of transformation. In the cycle proposed here, MOOCs' main contribution to transformation is the push they exert for academics to use digital learning tools. Through the interviews, it was found that some participants considered MOOCs as a turning point towards the meaningful use of new teaching tools and approaches over the Web. That perception was far from unanimous, but there was some consensus that has been some move towards new approaches to teaching through technologies since MOOCs came into the scene.

5.1.4. Many academics have become involved in the production of MOOCs
A common internal process for MOOCs to soak into an institution is through an agreement between a platform provider and the senior management of a university, usually with the highest institutional authorities involved. A task force is then created to advertise the partnership, call for expressions of interest to participate, and select the best of these. This is the process that was followed in all the institutions to which the participants belonged. Detailed descriptions of this process are found in White & White's work (2016) from the lens of Socio-Technical Interaction Networks (STIN) theory. This process tends to involve many academics in an institution, usually depending on the size of the investment. This involvement can be direct and indirect. Some academics are tasked with leading roles in the MOOC development, but many are asked, or volunteer, to contribute with content, advice, reviews and support.

5.1.5. Intensification of the use of digital learning tools
When academics join a MOOC endeavour for the first time, they often also use certain digital tools for the first time. They do not always operate all these tools, for example the content management system provided by the platform, which is usually handled by the learning designers. Academics are, however, often asked to collaborate in the production of digital assets. For this, they use digital tools novel to them, and very often they are trained in this by other MOOC team members. A significant example is the discussion forums when the MOOCs are running. Judging from the conversations with participants (see subsection 4.2.2), this was on many occasions the first time they made a meaningful use of semi-synchronous social media communication tools, which elicited their reflections on talking to unknown people in Web 2.0 environments.

109

5.1.6. Digital practices after MOOC involvement
Some of the participants recognised an intensification in their use of digital tools after their involvement in MOOCs, especially social media and multimedia tools. Some are keener to participate in a video recording after their MOOC participation, feeling more confident to do so., Some others use their newly created Linkedin and Facebook groups, and there were some who incorporated a blogging system in their modules. That is not true for absolutely everyone, as there were some others who reported not having experienced any change in that respect. However, it can be argued that MOOCs contribute to the popularisation of digital practices in the institution. Perhaps it would be going too far to state that MOOCs convert academics into digital practitioners, but they certainly establish scenarios for the meaningful use of, and reflection about, digital education technologies.

5.1.7. Competencies are cascaded across the institution
MOOCs are sizeable projects that require frequent communications among teams with diverse roles in an institution, mixing staff in professional services departments, libraries and academic departments (White & White, 2016). The knowledge transmitted through team meetings, queries, support sessions and other communication events cascades through these networks, infusing digital competencies across the institution, in turn contributing to a reinforcement of the institutional digital culture. It is noticeable that participants in the studies often reported having `talked about digital with many people' intensively during their involvement in MOOCs.

5.1.8. Digital education transformation in HEIs is facilitated
From the observation that frequent instances of transformation occur at individual level, it can be inferred that the university moves towards digital transformation at an institutional level from bottom-up pressures.

5.2. Responding to HEIs' digital transformation requirements
In this thesis, digital transformation has been theoretically conceptualised as a driving force. It has been assumed that digital transformation has become a requirement, regardless of the extent to which it has been achieved so far. As a requirement, it expects a response. This

110

section contains a discussion of the responses of relevant individuals and the communities to which they belong, i.e. academics and HEIs, to these demands for digital transformation.

5.2.1. The principle of contradictions in action
One of the key principles of Activity Theory is that of contradictions (Engeström, 2001), which are particularly present in educational technology contexts (Murphy, 2008), as discussed in Chapter 2, (2.4.4.2 Activity Theory in TEL Settings'). The enactment of this principle of contradictions was repeatedly observed in the conversations with the participants, especially when reflecting upon the potential of MOOCs as agents of educational transformation. On several occasions, participants stated their view that the technologies used in MOOCs were simply reproducing old forms of teaching. This becomes especially apparent in the area of assessment, where a few participants stated that MOOCs were often just new placeholders for quiz questions that were no different to the old multiple choice questions that had been used in tests in order to save the time involved in providing meaningful feedback (see section 5.4.3 Assessment and feedback). Other examples of contradictions can be found in those participants who were expecting to engage in interesting conversations with wide communities of learners, but instead found that the forums were littered with small talk, personal introductions, and praise of the content, at best (see section 5.3.1. `Attention to diverse learning communities') It should be noted that contradictions not only work in the direction of barriers to transformation, but also in the opposite direction, as motives for change and development. As Engeström points out, "as the contradictions of an activity system are aggravated, some individual participants begin to question and deviate from its established norms. In some cases, this escalates into collaborative envisioning and a deliberate collective change effort" (2001, p. 137). This was also observed in the interactions with the participants. There was a recurring theme in which participants were demanding more institutional support to develop MOOCs as a starting point to keep developing further online programmes. Their liaisons with learning designers and learning technologists created communities of practice in which there was a collective lobbying effort towards establishing structured institutional support to the development of new forms of educational provision, mainly in the form of the inclusion of these new tasks in their lists of statutory duties and responsibilities (see 4.3.3).

111

5.2.2. Different HEIs, different agendas
The role that MOOCs play in HEIs is highly variable not only from institution to institution, but from time to time. The support mechanisms in place, the staff and teams allocated, the funding dedicated, all these factors can quickly change over time, resulting in a radically different scenario depending on where and when it is observed. This fluidity has been reported in works such as that of White & White (2016). The impact of the institutional agendas in respect of MOOCs was widely discussed in the interviews, especially in the World Cafe study and the interviews with experienced academics. The individual views and experiences of each of the participants were highly varied. Different participants had a different understandings of the intentions of the university in respect to MOOCs. Some thought of MOOCs as merely instruments for experimentation. Some others had a very clear idea of MOOCs as exclusively public engagement tools. Others understood the multiplicity of purposes for embracing MOOCs in the institution. Perhaps the most common understanding was that MOOCs are so new that their ultimate purpose is yet to be determined, both by the senior decision makers who ordered them, and by the academics and professional services who developed them.

5.2.3. Platforms and pedagogies
MOOCs are usually the product of partnerships between institutions and platforms. These platforms not only offer the hosting, but also the user interface of the courses (Yuan & Powell, 2013). The user interface influences the user experience, and in turn the learner experience. This is why the pedagogical underpinnings of a platform can shape how the learning object of a course are distributed and displayed. In this thesis, some of the studies were carried out in an institution who partnered with FutureLearn, while another study was in an institution who partnered with edX. Some influence from the platform's pedagogical philosophy, or perhaps alignment, was noticed in some specific instances. These instances were not analysed in depth, or exploited, as they were out of the scope of this thesis. It should be mentioned, however, that behaviourist tradition is still current in many settings, and clearly tangible.

112

5.3. Opportunities for a competent workforce for transformation
5.3.1. Teaching competencies for transformation
In section 2.1.4 `Teaching Competencies', a table was presented with a model for teaching competencies and motivations. After analysing the findings, the following table adds the enhanced competencies that can be acquired as a result of the participation in the development of a MOOC.
Table 5.1. MOOC-enhanced competencies

TEACHING COMPETENCY Planning of the teaching and learning process

DESCRIPTION

Encompassing the management of the different approaches to learning from a problem solution perspective, given a) the different disciplinespecific pedagogies and the different stages of intellectual development and b) the different context-specific pedagogies relevant to online and flexible learning. Applying awareness of the wide diversity of learning communities, and knowing how to use a seamless pedagogy. Emphasis is put on careful quality assurance of the materials presented, given their potentially global reach. Organising their own continuous professional development in view of the new interactions with learning design professionals. Choosing the most appropriate training among the different options in the institutional offer, in light of the awareness of diverse learning communities' needs, acquired as a result of new interactions with these communities. Adapting the institution's context to the current society of information and knowledge. Competence in the use of novel learning technologies, adapting these to their teaching and learning processes. Applying the needed and available extended resources to organise novel and meaningful learning experiences, selecting the most appropriate method depending on the digital learning activities proposed, and developing innovative instructional tasks. Enhancing the pedagogical skill of building the meanings of knowledge, and communicating it to wide and diverse audiences, not only with in-house students, but with a wider learning community. Offering new forms of support and orientation, especially through the organisation of scalable approaches to online mentoring, by leveraging 113

Content preparation

Organisation and justification

Use of new technologies

Teaching methodology design

Communication and interaction with students Tutoring and

counseling Assessment

network learning approaches. Creating ingenuous scalable assessment approaches beyond the multiple choice test, taking advantages of the learners' potential ability to self-assess, and to assess others. Selecting the most relevant feedback needs of diverse learning communities so as to maximise the impact of general feedback messages. Acquiring an enhanced awareness of the relationship between the duties and dilemmas of the teaching profession, both in the open and closed educational spaces, where there are a set of values that challenge social reality; Fostering critical thinking, solidarity and justice in global, networked and online contexts.

Reflection and research about teaching

5.3.2. The element of confidence
Confidence is an important trait of a competent educator, as explained in section 2.1.5 `The Role of Confidence in Teaching Competencies'. In the focus groups with ECAs, confidence was a prominent theme, and many participants stated having gained confidence when mentoring in MOOCs. There were also more experienced academics in study 4 who stated that MOOCs enhanced their confidence in front of a camera, or in their social media interactions (see section 4.2.2). Therefore, it could be argued that MOOCs enhance competencies by enhancing confidence. However, confidence is not an element usually included in teaching competency frameworks. There are exceptions such as the Facilitation Competency Framework of the National College for School Leadership (2012), but they are not usual. The absence of explicit and fully elaborated mentions to confidence in most competency frameworks is understandable for several reasons. Perhaps the main barrier to the inclusion of confidence is that there is little research that seeks empirical evidence on the relationship between competency and confidence in educational settings focussed on educators, despite the abundance of studies on the relationship between confidence and the attainment of pupils (Metcalfe, 1997). Another obstacle is that both confidence and self-confidence are difficult to benchmark against competency frameworks, as it is difficult to support with evidence. There are of measuring tools for this purpose, such as the Rosenberg Self-esteem Scale (Rosenberg, 1965), widely used in social research, but no attempts have been made to incorporate them into competency frameworks. 114

5.3.3. Digital literacies development: cascading knowledge across staff
A fundamental element of a smooth digital transformation in an organisation is a digitally literate workforce. This is the reason why a digitally literate workforce has been considered an outcome of the whole Activity Theory mapping in section 2.5.4.3 `Activity Theory and This Thesis'. As explained in that section, when using MOOCs as tools, academics (the so-called subjects in the AT map) engage in new transformative practices that have a digitally literate workforce as a desirable outcome. The findings displayed in this thesis contain a high number of instances in which academics at all levels of experience, from novice to expert educators, engaged in practices that were perceived as means of enhancing digital competencies. Through their involvement with MOOCs, many of the participants recognised their engagement in a wide range of digital practices, in line with Weller's descriptions of the transformation of digital practice (Weller, 2011), discussed in section 2.1.3 `The role of competencies in digital education transformation'.

5.3.3.1. Information and media literacy
A significant example is that of information and media literacy, as described in the Higher Education teachers' version of the Jisc digital capabilities framework (Jisc, 2018). Within the findings chapter, section 4.2.3 `Information literacy', it can be appreciated how many of the interviewed academics became aware of the legal issues around managing digital content, especially in terms of copyrights and licensing. Much of that knowledge emerged and spread around the institution as a result of the interactions created around MOOC production and delivery. Academics engaged in frequent conversations and negotiations with staff, mainly learning designers and asset managers, who had broad expertise in digital copyrights and licensing. These academics were not necessarily digital champions with expertise and inclinations to digital practices, which means that digital learning designers were not only `preaching to the converted'. Instead, it could be argued that a specific element of digital education culture, namely content sharing, spread around the faculties, reaching academics who had not previously thought about it in detail. The element of open practices is particularly relevant to the development of information literacies. Many of the open practices that, according to Weller (2011), contribute to digital transformative practices are closely related to content sharing. The cascaded knowledge about `what open means' and `what is open and what is not' within the institution as a result of the inclusion of MOOCs in their portfolio is palpable. Frequent discussions about openness take place in the course of the MOOC development and delivery activities, in 115

which academics necessarily engage by the sole fact of forming part of a MOOC development team. That was also an important part of the discussions with participants in the interviews, especially when discussing the value that they were adding to their learning materials, and the positive mission they were accomplishing by making these learning experiences available online for those who otherwise were not able to afford it. As well as the provision of free educational resources, the value of openness as the freedom to reuse and repurpose a large corpus of content openly available was also a recurrent conversation topic in the interviews. The above are all arguments to support the idea that MOOCs can contribute to the diffusion of important elements of open and digital culture across HEIS, a digital culture that is needed for effective digital transformation processes.

5.3.3.2. Online communication and networked learning
Another representative example is that of the skills for online communication. The Jisc Digital capabilities model places emphasis on these kind of skills by dedicating a whole section to digital communication, collaboration and participation, defining it as the capacity to communicate effectively in digital media and spaces, participate in digital teams and working groups, and o participate in, facilitate and build digital networks. In subsection 4.2.2 `Online communication' of the findings chapter there were several accounts of academics at all levels, from ECAs to expert educationalists, illustrating a process of having developed new digital communication skills when interacting in social media. The interactions of these academics were carried out for educational purposes, and many of them perceived an enhanced understanding of networked learning through practice. As discussed in section 2.1.3 `The role of competencies in digital education transformation', networked practices are considered to be an essential element of digital practice transformation (Weller, 2011), and MOOCs can play an important role in equipping academics with this capability. One of the main ways in which the development of these capabilities is enacted through MOOCs is that of participation in the communicative tools provided by the MOOC platform. These usually come in the form of forums, where the learning communities interact as part of their learning process. These participation forums are often complemented with adjacent spaces in other social media such as Twitter, Facebook and Youtube, where academics have the opportunity to interact  and often do  with learners as part of a learning activity. These interactions often place educators in spaces that they would not otherwise visit frequently, therefore integrating them in social interaction digital forms that may be new to them. 116

6. Conclusion
This thesis is the result of the insights gathered during six years of research and professional practice around MOOCs. Sustained on the theoretical foundations of Activity Theory, the thesis has placed HEIs in a universe where forces such as digitalisation and changes in educational demands have allowed the emergence of new educational tools such as MOOCs. It has shown how academics, the subjects of this study, engage in real-world experiences to hone their competencies, ultimately helping HEIs to meet the challenges of education in the digital economy. In this conclusion chapter, the research questions posed in the thesis will be answered. Later on, a discussion of the contributions of this thesis will be presented. These will be followed by a set of recommendations for different HEIs stakeholders, namely ECAs, established academics, and senior decision makers. Finally, future work will be suggested that builds on this ongoing research project.

6.1. Answers to the research questions
In this subsection, the three blocks of research questions will be answered. The questions were the following:  Q1 What competencies do academics develop as a result of their involvement in the production and delivery of MOOCs?   How do these competencies contribute to a transformation in digital practice? How does the massiveness and openness of MOOCs influence their teaching practices, both online and on campus?  Q2 How do academics respond to the digital transformation demands of HEIs as a result of their involvement in MOOCs?  What kinds of operational and workload concerns arise for academics involved in MOOCs, in relation to wider online/digital learning tasks?  What kinds of new work dynamics and relationships arise when academics are involved in MOOCs and other forms of digital/online learning?  Q3 What opportunities can MOOCs bring to HEIs for a digitally competent workforce?

117



How can the teaching quality of HEIs benefit from the adoption of MOOCs in their portfolio?



How can the digital preparedness of HEIs benefit from the adoption of MOOCs in their portfolio?

6.1.1. Question block 1
As the analyses conducted in the different studies of this thesis suggest, academics often seem to develop a wide range of competencies as a result of their involvement in MOOCs. Of these competencies, some are perceived as more salient than others, depending on how experienced academics are. More experienced academics seem to enhance three main sets of competencies: their ability to communicate in digital contexts, their understanding of the implications of sharing content online, and their drive to explore innovative educational approaches without compromising quality standards. On the other hand, they do not tend to perceive a significant reinforcement of their teaching competencies beyond MOOCs, with the exception of isolated instances in which they rethink the way they deliver specific pieces of content. Early career academics seem to develop different kinds of competencies when working with MOOCs. These are more related to teaching, consolidating their abilities to communicate discipline-specific content. The main source of this consolidation is often an enhanced confidence in their own subject knowledge and their ability to explain it. Both experienced and non-experienced academics find in MOOCs a set of challenges that require them to find creative solutions to new problems. These are mainly related to the fact that they are not in control of their learners' profiles, due to the openness and massiveness of MOOCs. By having to anticipate how their content is going to be received, as well as having to reflect upon multiple learner reactions and feedback, often in the form of comments, academics engage in certain transformative practices that often encourage them to rethink the way they teach back on campus. This is not always the case, however. It should be clarified that the fact that certain transformative practices take place in MOOC development processes, does not mean that academics are transforming education by working with MOOCs.

6.1.2. Question block 2
For academics, involvement in MOOCs seems to provoke certain changes in their responses to digital transformation in Higher Education. They often perceive that MOOCs as 118

tools are too new to fit in to the long-established organisational processes in their institutions. On the other hand, they display a generalised eagerness to participate in educational innovation ventures as members of newly created teams with an unprecedented variety of roles and responsibilities. Academics also tend to place trust in the know-how of digital learning specialists for the MOOC development process. That is especially true in pedagogical and online communication aspects. They tend to follow guidance and instructions, and negative reactions towards the advice from professional services are rare. As an exception, perhaps there is a certain generalised resistance to give in when interpreting content sharing regulations and policies. Among academics involved in MOOCs, there is also a generalised feeling that more effort is needed to establish the role of MOOCs within the institutional strategies. Academics demand much more support from senior management in that respect, as it seems that MOOCs are staying in the experimental stage for too long. The incorporation of MOOC-related tasks in contractual duties and responsibilities in exchange of the equivalent alleviation of nonMOOC related tasks is perhaps one of the main demands in that respect. The allocation of support mechanisms such as teaching assistantships and more multimedia production support are also elements that academics perceive as lacking. MOOCs also seem to generate new forms of collegiality within the institutions. Teams are usually created with academic and non-academic members at different levels of seniority, but the novelty of the projects seems to reduce hierarchical distances, at least while projects are in the development stage. In Activity Theory terms, the use of MOOCs as novel tools seem to contribute to a reinforced sense of community where subjects with different levels of responsibility experiment and innovate together, with little certainty about the outcome of the product.

6.1.3. Question block 3
MOOCs can contribute to a transformational culture in HEIs, if appropriately aligned to their strategic agendas. From an Activity Theory Perspective, MOOCs can quickly and effectively spread a culture of change in the community, i.e. the institution. They can become helpful tools to familiarise 119

subjects, with innovative educational approaches. Frequent and intense interactions around those novel approaches emerge when MOOCs are introduced in the institution. Conversations with different stances are generated. These internal discourses bring online, digital education, and educational transformation into focus. Even though these stances can sometimes exhibit resistance, scepticism and rejection, they still raise awareness and cascade knowledge about digital learning innovation. The presence of these discourses within the institution can therefore contribute to a digitally and transformationally competent workforce. A lack of sustained support from senior university decision makers, however, poses some risk of missing these opportunities. Sustained support means a steady alignment of MOOCs with the digital and educational aspects of the university strategy over time, instead of intermittent and impulsive initiatives, too often in response to specific funding opportunities. It is of paramount importance to envisage the middle- and long-term benefits of MOOCs in the institution, often intangible at first glance, and look beyond the short-term outcomes. This is the best way to avoid disappointment and disillusionment, too frequent a reaction to MOOCs from HEIs, often due to short-sighted attitudes rather than research-informed insights.

120

6.3. Contributions of this thesis
This thesis has been the product of a series of studies that have shed light on the competencies for higher education transformation achieved through involvement in the production and delivery of MOOCs. These studies have been published in relevant journals and conference proceedings, attracting a high number of citations for a pre-doctoral project. In this section, a breakdown of the contributions is presented.

6.3.1. Theoretical contribution
One of the main contributions of this thesis is a novel interpretation of certain elements of the Activity Theory model. MOOCs have been placed as a tool for education transformation within an activity system. The use of innovative digital technologies has been interpreted as a rule, on the understanding that there are limited alternatives to it. This assumption may seem technologically determinist at a first glance. By accepting this rule, however, the new tools we are provided with can be used used purposefully, to tackle the challenges of education in the twenty-first century.

6.3.2. Methodological contribution
In order to weave five studies conducted over five years into a unified and coherent narrative, a template analysis method was deployed on the ensemble of the raw data, instead of the analysed data of each of the studies. That is, a new template was created only for this thesis, which would align with the Activity Theory based conceptualisation, and the research questions also bespoke for the thesis. The description of this methodology contributes with a novel approach to combine different studies, drawing directly from their raw data instead of from its previous interpretation.

6.3.3. Empirical contribution
This thesis has contributed novel empirical evidence of the effects of MOOCs in the development of competencies defined in established frameworks such as the UKPSF and Jisc Digital Capabilities framework. Through interviews and focus group sessions, rich discussions have taken place with a significant number of participants on how MOOCs have been  or not  a catalyst for change in their educational practices. For this reason, all the transcripts of these discussions have been added to the appendices section.

121

6.3.4. Axiological contribution
This thesis is an unhidden pitch for the adoption of MOOCs in HEIs, beyond the hype they experienced a few years ago, between 2012 and 2014. Without ignoring the reservations held by a significant part of the research community, this thesis has stated the intrinsic value of MOOCs from an unusual angle. This angle relates to the informal, vicarious learning that occurs when MOOCs are used as teaching tools. MOOCs are often portrayed as unfulfilled promises of education transformation, democratisation and monetisation. These discourses are often deterrents for university strategic decision makers adopting or continuing support for MOOCs in their institutions. The discourses, therefore, tend to result in MOOCs not being given sufficient time in which to evolve, mature and adapt in order to fulfil their promise. This thesis states the value of MOOCs from an alternative perspective, with a firm belief that MOOCs are still the great white hope for quality higher education in society.

6.4. Recommendations
As explained in several passages through the course of this document, this thesis is the outcome of both research and professional experience gathered over nearly six years of MOOC-related activity. The conclusions achieved as a result of the observations made during this period have left me in the position to make three sets of recommendations, addressed at three different levels of seniority. This section will start with recommendations to ECAs, followed by recommendations to established academics, and finishing with recommendations at strategic and policy levels.

6.4.1. Recommendations to ECAs
6.4.1.1. Seek for opportunities to participate in MOOC delivery
Participating in MOOC production and delivery is advisable for ECAs, if opportunities arise. One of the most common routes to becoming an established academic is through the completion of a PhD and a subsequent series of postdoctoral research positions, to achieve a lectureship later on. Over this early career stage, it is not uncommon to be assigned some teaching tasks with not too high levels of responsibility. Marking, assisting practical sessions, running occasional seminars, covering absences, are some of the tasks usually performed at this transition stage. MOOC-related tasks could be added to this list of activities and could smooth the transition from researcher to teacher. The contact with the learners is meant to increase gradually as the academic career progresses, but the engagement in teaching 122

activities can sometimes be abrupt, for example from having performed a few demonstration tasks to running a whole module. ECAs should therefore consider participating in MOOC delivery, such as mentoring and teaching assistantship, when the chance is presented. In fact, ECAs should actively seek these opportunities for their own benefit, for two main reasons: They provide work experience in digitally rich environments, which enhances digital competencies; they also provide a potentially high number of rich interactions with learners, relatively experimental and at a relatively low risk, which enhances a wide range of teaching competencies.

6.4.1.2. Seek out opportunities to participate in MOOC production
For ECAs, opportunities to contribute to MOOC content are perhaps not as frequent as those to deliver it. They are not nonexistent, however, and can provide a wide range of opportunities not only for training, but also to enhance reputation and CVs. ECAs are therefore advised to seek out these opportunities, and take advantage of the interactions with multimedia production and learning design professionals that result from providing online content in this context. On most occasions, the pedagogical principles that generate the constraints in the specialist content required in MOOCs, are applicable to the wider context of higher education. Participating in the production of a MOOC in the early stages of one's career can also introduce curriculum design practices, and other activities related to more senior academic practice. ECAs are therefore encouraged to make the most of the interactions with senior academics resulting from planning and producing MOOCs. Also, ECAs should make efforts to maximise the impact of their contribution in MOOCs, by recording it in their lists of academic achievements, as well as promoting their work through a variety of digital platforms, since the mere awareness of it can itself be a valuable result of their participation in MOOCs.

6.4.1.3. Seek certification, engage in reflective practice
Professional certifications such as HEA fellowship and ALT membership can be beneficial for the career progression of ECAs. Obtaining these certifications requires producing a reflective practice document, assessed against a set of criteria, widely described in this thesis. If an ECA has collaborated in a MOOC, it is highly advisable to invoke the experience acquired in such activity. As explained in the thesis, participation in MOOCs addresses many of the descriptors in these certification systems. It is therefore advisable to become familiar 123

with the requirements of these certifications before engaging in any teaching activity, including a MOOC. This way, practice can be carried out with these criteria in mind before hand, making it easier to address and record the most important descriptors of teaching quality.

6.4.1.4. Participate in MOOCs as a learner
For ECAs, signing up as learners to a MOOC, or several MOOCs, in their discipline is highly advisable. This helps develop an understanding not only of how content in delivered to wide audiences, but also how these audiences receive it. Full participation, including frequent interactions with other learners and completing the assessments, can provide a complete and detailed picture of the intended learner experience of a particular MOOC. This can equip ECAs with an enhanced understanding of how learning materials should be presented for a positive learning experience. It is important to observe how the content and activities are sequenced, how and what type of the tasks are set, where it is apparent that more resources have been deployed to multimedia production, and other aspects of course design. It is also important to do this with a critical eye, assessing what is to be praised and what can be improved.

6.4.1.5. Consider the risk attendant to online exposure
Participating in a MOOC involves broadcasting to relatively large numbers of unknown people who are likely to express opinions. It is not a one-way communication process, but a two-way one. In this process, one party, the educator, is always known. The other party, the learner, not always. It is therefore advisable to make a clear differentiation between one's academic professional identity and personal identity. Online identity management is an important digital skill for digital wellbeing. That becomes especially true when it comes to MOOCs, and it deserves sufficient attention.

6.4.1.6. Balance time and workload against reward
One of the main challenges posed by being involved in MOOCs is perhaps establishing boundaries between non-paid outreach activities and paid tasks. MOOCs are often seen as a springboard for academic recognition. ECAs involved in MOOCs, especially PhD students and candidates, can benefit from the experience gained in participating in these ventures, and from the recognition associated to it. It is rare, however, that ECAs are able to obtain direct financial rewards to compensate for the amount of effort put in to producing MOOCs. Indirect rewards are neither guaranteed, such as criteria promotion within the institution, 124

criteria explicitly mentioned in job descriptions. In other words, it is rare to find an academic job advertisement in which having been involved in MOOCs is a `bonus'. It is therefore advisable to see MOOCs as a complementary activity with long term and uncertain rewards, and to devote full dedication only when clearly stated in the duties and responsibilities of an academic contract.

6.4.2. Recommendations to established academics
6.4.2.1. All of the above
All the recommendations for ECAs expressed in the previous subsection apply also to more experienced and established academics. MOOCs and online learning are relatively new to most academics, and the change of context involves a change of approach. When navigating in such uncharted terrain, it is advisable to stay well informed, not only through research and journalistic literature, but also through frequent informal inquiry within the institution.

6.4.2.2. Empower the juniors
If a senior academic is given the opportunity to participate in the development of a MOOC, it is advisable to seek as much involvement from junior academics as possible. Involving juniors should not only consist of letting them participate as voluntary teaching assistants during the delivery stage, but also involving them in the creation stage. It is also advisable to seek as many resources as possible to reward their participation, either financially or by alleviating them from other duties and responsibilities. To maximise the impact of their participation in the development of MOOCs on their careers, senior members should provide junior members with guidance on how to match the skills acquired against teaching and research excellence frameworks, and advise on how to get this appropriately certified and recorded.

6.4.2.3. Research and publish
Academic literature on MOOCs is relatively new. As of 2018, publications about MOOCs are not older than six or seven years. Besides the frequently commented `end of the hype', MOOCs are still a subject of academic interest. MOOCs are still present in most digital education calls for papers, and academic communities of many disciplines still demand MOOC-related literature. When involved in a MOOC, every academic should think of conducting research on any aspect of it, be it the analysis of their outcomes, a reflection of

125

their experience, or the impact in their target learning community. There are still many research gaps to be filled in this area.

6.4.2.4. Champion and lobby
MOOCs are new tools for HEIs, and as such it is still difficult to establish an HE system-wide common understanding about their role. It is also still difficult to determine their outcomes, and whether they fulfil their mission. These uncertainties often lead to institutional disengagement, which in turn leads to the MOOC-supportive policies being discontinued, or never adopted in the first place. This disengagement from senior decision makers can easily extend to online and digital learning supportive policies, which in turn can stifle education transformation. Continuous bottom-up pressure is therefore needed to raise the profile of MOOCs and other transformative approaches to the higher echelons of institutions.

6.4.3. Strategic and policy recommendations
This third set of recommendations is addressed at those who have strategic responsibilities in a university. All these recommendations are made on the premise that running MOOCs requires a financial investment, the recoverability of which can be achieved with appropriate internal policies. If appropriately conducted, MOOC projects can add significant value to the educational provision of these universities.

6.4.3.1. Consider long term marketing
Since the early days of MOOCs, many universities have included MOOCs in their educational catalogues to be used as marketing tools. In many cases, funds originally allocated for marketing activities were dedicated to the production of MOOCs. The difficulties in finding immediate evidence of conversion from the leads created by MOOCs, however, has led many institutions to reduce or even discontinue funding. A strong recommendation here is to support MOOCs in a sustained manner in order to harness the long-term reputational benefits that they can contribute. MOOCs are relatively inexpensive digital marketing tools that can enhance the web presence of the institution, especially when compared to traditional communication and marketing services. Outcomes and conversion assessments should therefore be made in a much longer span of time than is currently the case. Also, the benchmark of these assessments should be adapted to the current demands of the digital economy, in order to avoid short-termist decisions that may not always be appropriate for the marketing interests of the institution.

126

6.4.3.2. Consider the digital maturity of the institution
It is highly advisable to consider the contribution that MOOCs can make to the digital maturity of the institution. When involved in MOOCs, staff handle an array of digital tools for educational purposes, beyond the platform interface. They engage in frequent social media interactions, they produce content in new formats such as video and animations, they experiment with novel authoring tools, and they often analyse the impact of their work in the learning communities. Such intense activity can therefore prepare the institution for the new digital challenges that it will inevitably face in the very near future. It is therefore advisable to integrate MOOCs into the digital strategies of the universities by creating mixed teams of academics, third-space professionals  i.e. learning designers and learning technologists  , media production staff, and Information Technologies staff. Assigning the development of MOOCs to these teams can enhance their cohesion, leaving the institution in a strong position to face the above-mentioned digital challenges.

6.4.3.3. Consider the mission of higher education
Most university strategy documents state that their ultimate mission is to provide a service to society, recognising that education is a social good to which universities must contribute. This argument should always be on the table when making decisions in terms of the resources to be dedicated to MOOCs, and it should be granted the weight it deserves. Although there are some well-founded critiques of how and why MOOCs are not fulfilling their apparent promise of becoming agents for social mobility, these discourses should be interpreted with caution and should not be used as arguments to preclude universities from embracing MOOCs. It may be true that, initially, they have mainly reached those already educated, but very little time has been allowed for them to permeate in layers of society where the real need resides. It is therefore recommended not to make premature decisions based on these criticisms.

6.4.3.4. Encourage internal use
It is advisable to establish policies whereby the materials developed for MOOCs must also be used internally in credit bearing modules. Such a policy would have a number of parallel benefits. Firstly, it would guarantee the authenticity of the learning experiences in which MOOC participants engage. Learning in a MOOC of a given university becomes a similar experience to learning as a registered student, which in turn becomes an authentic taster, or primer, of a full programme. Secondly, the quality of the learning experiences for in-campus students can be enhanced, since the materials developed for MOOCs are under the scrutiny 127

of large learning communities, whose feedback can be effectively harvested. Finally, appropriately planned activities in which both internal students and external MOOC participants interact can become enriched learning experiences for all.

6.4.3.5. Secure academics' time
Developing MOOCs has often been understood as an additional activity in which academics engage voluntarily in exchange for enhancing their impact and having the opportunity to experiment with new educational approaches. This is not a sustainable approach to engaging academics with MOOCs, however, since these can be discouraged when the initial enthusiasm expires. An institutional commitment to MOOCs should involve the inclusion of MOOC-related tasks ino the lists of duties and responsibilities in contracts for academic staff, as well as in the list of objectives in their appraisals. Time devoted to MOOCs should count as much as time devoted to any other administrative, research and educational tasks. Otherwise, a generalised feeling that working with MOOCs is an unrewarded activity can spread in the institution, as well as the risk of associating it to any other kind of education innovation activity. That can in turn become yet another barrier for education transformation in the longer term.

6.5. Limitations
As i with any research project this thesis has certain limitations, the awareness of which can be useful for future research. A description of the methodological limitations was provided in section 3.7. There are other limitations that affect the whole study, mainly related to the positionality of the researcher, the differences in the contexts where the research was conducted, and the evolving nature of the topic. These three limitations are discussed in the subsection below:

6.5.1. Personal bias
Both the researcher and the the vast majority of participants in all the studies were manifested MOOC advocates. The selection criteria for the participants inevitably involved having taught through a MOOC, so the sample was already self-selective. Perhaps more objectivity was found in the last study in which expert educationalists were interviewed, but even in that there was a generalised advocacy for MOOCs.

128

Although a serious attempt at a fair treatment has been given to the discourses that reflect upon the misgivings of MOOCs, most of the conversations took place on the assumption that MOOCs were beneficial to education, and to society as a whole. The nuances of such a statement have been the main object of study of this thesis, but a bias towards positive attitudes to MOOCs can be appreciated throughout.

6.5.2. Diversity of contexts
All participants in these studies were European. That is perhaps the only trait that they had in common. The diversity was high in the rest of aspects. Perhaps the most pervasive diversity consisted of the pedagogical underpinnings of the platforms where participants' MOOCs were hosted. In the study with experienced academics, participants were operating on an xMOOCs platform with a marked behaviourist philosophy of learning. In the conversations with these academics, there were many references to innovation and practice transformation, and the behaviourist philosophy of both the platform and the university was palpable at times. This was different to the constructivist pedagogical underpinnings on which most of the expert educationalists focused when conducting the last study. ECAs remained more neutral in respect to learning theories, although they were trained to conduct a social-constructivist based practice, and in most cases that was their first teaching experience. Another pervasive contextual diversity was that of the strategic role that MOOCs had in the different universities in which participants worked. This resulted in diverse accounts of participants' experiences around the role of MOOCs in their institutions. Although these diversities were anticipated, they made it somewhat problematic to achieve a unified corpus to be analysed. A thorough attempt was nonetheless made at addressing questions that were common to a variety of contexts, regardless of the differences in the learning theories influencing the participants, and the strategies of the universities where they were working.

6.5.3. Currency
The research work leading to this thesis started when MOOCs were at a very early stage, indeed when the FutureLearn platform had barely started to operate. MOOCs have evolved significantly since then, as has the literature about MOOCs, and the role of MOOCs play in universities. To address this limitation, this thesis has analysed phenomena surrounding MOOCs, such as the competencies that they generate. It has therefore attempted to avoid 129

the portrayal of a blurry image in motion by targeting elements of their evolution that are not so time sensitive.

6.6. Future work
This thesis addresses an unexplored research area, by relating MOOCs and professional development for teachers in the digital economy. I firmly believe that more research in this area can make a significant contribution to transformation in higher education. This section suggests avenues for future research. The first is the addition of quantitative analysis, the second is a further set of interviews with assessors of established bodies for teaching certifications.

6.6.1. Quantitative analysis
I have developed this thesis within an epistemological orientation in which I reached my conclusions by interpreting the combined narratives of the participants, the literature, and my own professional experience. Although this approach is purely qualitative, it allows the inclusion of quantitative elements without compromising its validity. Mixed methods are extensively used in social science research, and valuable research can be produced with them (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004). In order to add a quantitative element to this ensemble of studies, a survey that has already been designed, is included in Appendix D. This survey intends to involve a large number of participants, initially across the UK, with varied levels of experience and involvement in MOOCs and other online learning ventures. The survey intends to determine how working with MOOCs is perceived as a way to stimulate the competencies needed to teach in a twenty-first century university.

6.6.2. Interviews with assessors
This thesis has generated insights about how academics can gain competencies to face the challenges of transformational practice. The thesis has broken down these competencies into recognisable elements, present in the most widely-used excellence and competency frameworks in the UK. These insights could be valuable in informing further updates of these or other competency frameworks. These insights on their own could inform policies at a large scale, but they may lack authority to become influential, after all they come from a doctoral thesis and a relatively short career. A further layer of authority could be added with one more study, however, this time with 130

assessors of official certification bodies such as the Higher Education Academy and the Association of Learning Technologists. A set of interviews with these assessors, touching on the transformational competencies needed and gained through MOOC practice, would add significant value to this project.

7. Relevant publications
I started my PhD studies by the end of 2013, and finished by the end of 2018. Over those five years, I authored over 30 articles, and attracted nearly 200 citations according to Google Scholar. 2 This section is an annotated bibliography of the publications that have resulted from the personal research project associated to this thesis. In each of the entries below, an abstract of the publication is provided, together with an explanation of its relevance to the thesis. The publications are listed in order of perceived relevance, instead of chronological or alphabetical order.

2

https://scholar.google.co.uk/citations?user=KScpIH425m0C&hl=en

131

León-Urrutia, M; Fielding, S. and White, S. (2016) Professional development through MOOCs in higher education institutions: challenges and opportunities for Phd students working as mentors. Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 1, 1-11. (doi:10.5334/jime.427) "The advent of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) has been altering the Higher Education landscape in recent years. This kind of courses are penetrating in an increasing number of universities, the majority of which do not seem to have intentions to stop offering them in the short term. Such courses are generating new educational scenarios to which universities have to adapt, which creates a set of challenges and opportunities, most of them related to the use of technology in education. This study aims to shed light on such challenges and opportunities when a university employs postgraduate students as MOOC mentors. For this study, a set of focus group interviews were conducted in an English university to PhD students in various disciplines. In the interviews, participants share their experiences as mentors, especially regarding how they developed certain teaching and digital skills, and how they faced certain challenges related to their digital identity. The results suggest that participating in MOOCs as mentors can help early career researchers to develop certain teaching, digital, and academic skills that could be beneficial for the institutions they work for, and for themselves. However, their online exposure sometimes raises certain implications for their public image, their working conditions, and their online professional identity." This was the first significant journal publication during the course of my PhD studies. It responded to a call of papers from the Journal of Interactive Media in Education, inviting research papers within the scope of the FutureLearn Academic Network. As a result of the publication of this paper, the identification of the scope of this thesis was significantly eased. The paper fulfilled different functions: it contributed to the definition of the internal approach to MOOC mentoring within our institution. It also contributed to the body of research that forms the theoretical and pedagogical underpinnings of the FutureLearn platform. It also formed one of the three main pillars of this thesis, namely the interviews with ECAs.

132

León-Urrutia, M., Cobos, R., & Dickens, K. (2018). MOOCs and their Influence on Higher Education Institutions: Perspectives from the Insiders. Journal of New Approaches in Educational Research. 2018, 7 (1): 40-45. doi: 10.7821/naer. 2018.1. 252 URI: http://hdl. handle. net/10045/72498. "Since Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) became a global phenomenon in 2012, there has been constant evolution in the way Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) make sense of them. HEIs embracing MOOCs have dedicated a variety of human resource to this venture. Only in a minority of cases, staff have been appointed exclusively to this role. In all other cases, MOOC related tasks have been allocated to professionals who were already performing other educational tasks. This article contains a study that captures the experiences of these professionals in a Spanish university and a British university, as relates to their involvement in MOOCs. Interviews and group sessions were conducted to ascertain the influence of MOOCs in their practice, and in their opinions about the role of MOOCs in their institutions. The results seem to suggest that participants have positive attitudes towards incorporating MOOCs at the university, although they demand a serious bet for this educational approach from the strategic decision makers in the institutions." This publication was the result of the combination of two studies: the World Cafe Study and the study with experienced academics. The latter study was conducted in collaboration with two universities, who partnered with two very different MOOC platform providers. This collaboration sparked frequent conversations in which the pedagogical underpinnings of the platforms were widely discussed, compared and contrasted. The publication helps understand the extent to which an external platform can influence the pedagogical approach to online learning. One institution-platform partnership had a behaviourist predominance, where many instances were found to illustrate such an approaches. The other institution-platform partnership embraced a predominantly social constructivist approach. The strategic approaches of the institutions were also intensively compared and contrasted. These comparisons led to the realisation that both approaches were only predominant, but not exclusive. That is, the `behaviourist' partnership had many participants realising the social learning role of MOOCs, but there were not many behaviourist inclinations in the `constructivist' partnership. Another key finding in this paper was that academics demand a much clearer and determined policy towards innovative approaches such as MOOCs. That was the case in both institutions studied, where a lack of fluency in the communications between different hierarchical levels was reported.

133

León-Urrutia, M., White, S., & White, S. (2016, February). MOOCs in Higher Education Magazines: A Content Analysis of Internal Stakeholder Perspectives. In Computer Supported Education: 7th International Conference, CSEDU 2015, Lisbon, Portugal, May 23-25, 2015, Revised Selected Papers (Vol. 583, p. 395). Springer "Higher Education magazines have echoed the rapid spread of MOOCs in Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) since 2012. In their pages, MOOC related articles are proliferating. The focus of such articles has often been the disruptive nature as well as the survival of this new form of open online education, especially the first years. However, there is also a great deal of mentions of how internal stakeholders in HEIs perceive the advent of MOOCs. These perceptions are the object of analysis in this article. Using the Content Analysis (CA) method, MOOC related sources in three Higher Education magazines during 2014 have been analysed against a set of key themes. These themes have been established by combining data from two previous studies: a Content Analysis of MOOC related academic literature, and a set of interviews to internal stakeholders using grounded theory. As the findings indicate, in 2014 the main concerns of internal stakeholders have been the new teaching practices and new work dynamics resulting from the incorporation of MOOCs in their working routines. It is argued that educational media no longer focuses on the debate of the future of MOOCs. Rather, the debate is on how MOOCs should be best implemented from a practitioner's perspective." This publication was the result of two years of intense reading and curation of journalistic articles about MOOCs. In 2013 and 2014, MOOCs were a frequent topic in HE magazines. We systematically stored and tagged MOOC related articles with a curation tool called Scoop.it. This curation tool did not give us significant web presence, just hundreds of visits to our site (https://www.scoop.it/t/moocs-and-heis), but it did allow us to classify hundreds of articles into themes and categories, which eased the creation of a systematic journalistic literature review. The paper was published in the CSEDU conference proceedings, and selected for a Springer Lecture Notes volume, attracting dozens of citations.

134

Fair, N., Russell, S., Harris, L., & Leon Urrutia, M. (2017). Enhancing the student experience: integrating MOOCs into campus based modules. (Educational Media International, in press) "Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are continuing to expand in Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). According to Class Central, over 1500 courses started in May 2017 alone. In some cases, these courses are becoming integrated into institutions, to such an extent that they are being incorporated in the on- campus curriculum. Externally-facing MOOCs are being used as part of face-to- face modules, often with the aim of leveraging the networked learning opportunities that these kind of open courses offer. There are a range of benefits which learners can enjoy when undertaking a university module in which participating in a MOOC is part of the syllabus. Firstly, there is the opportunity to learn from the latest research in the subject, often before it is published more formally. Secondly, they can collaborate not only with their peers, but with a global learning community, exposing learners to a significant diversity of ideas, approaches, experience and knowledge. Thirdly, there are all the well reported benefits to being able to study where, when and with whom you chose. There are also benefits to the creator university beyond that of developing teaching resources. Learners' engagement with the content may help to co-create research in real time, both for academic research and for research into MOOCs themselves. In addition, complex materials such as network maps or interactive games that have been developed for a MOOC at considerable care and expense, and been subjected to thorough quality assurance processes, can also be reused in other contexts within the university, for example for student recruitment or staff development purposes. In summary, there are a wide range of opportunities emerging from the integration of MOOCs into the classroom. However, at the moment it is not easy to evaluate the outcome of integrating MOOCs into traditional university modules, as there is not yet a great deal of research reporting on the area. Moreover, there are a wide range of methods that have been and can be used to this end: the participation in the MOOC may or may not be assessed; the role of the MOOC within the module can vary (teaching, revision, primer...etc); the role of oncampus learners can vary from mere participants to teaching assistants or content producers; the proportion of the MOOC learning materials used as module materials can also vary; and the timelines of the module in relation to the MOOC can also be very diverse. It is therefore important to assess the effectiveness of various initiatives in order to find the optimal internal uses of MOOCs. This paper reports on a socio-technical intervention in which 46 undergraduates on the Online Social Networks module at the University of Southampton also had the Learning in the Network Age and Power of Social Media FutureLearn MOOCs, and an offline support programme, integrated into the syllabus for revision purposes. Learners were surveyed before the module started to establish their prior experience of and attitudes to MOOCs. In order to reach an assessment of the effectiveness of the intervention, the module final grades and result profile, the learners assessed reflections and the anonymised end-of-module feedback forms were analysed. The module grade average increased by three percent, moving up a band, and the number of top grades awarded doubled. However, learner reflections and feedback were rather more mixed, with equal numbers of learners finding MOOCs of great value for deepening understanding as those who gained little benefit from the experience. Such diversity of outcomes led the researchers to a discussion of the barriers affecting a socio-technical approach to HE teaching and learning."

135

This paper reflects the insights gathered during my participation in a Curriculum Innovation module as a teacher. In this module, we integrated a MOOC which students had to participate in as part of their coursework. This was an eye-opening experience in many aspects: we learned how, as teachers, we currently tend to overestimate the digital competencies of the students, as well as our own. We also learned about the diversity of approaches to learning with the Web, and about the multiple shapes of the personal learning networks of the students, as well as our own. The paper was presented in the ICEM'17 conference in Naples, and selected for an issue of the Educational Media International journal, soon to be published.

136

White, S., Davis, H., Dickens, K.P., Leon-Urrutia, M., and Sanchez-Vera, M. M. (2015). MOOCs: What Motivates the Producers and Participants?. In Computer Supported Education: 6th International Conference, CSEDU 2014, Barcelona, Spain, April 1-3, 2014, Revised Selected Papers (Vol. 510, p. 99). Springer. "Within the current educational landscape, Massively Open Online Courses (MOOCs) have stimulated extensive interest and hype in a short time. It has been asserted that these open courses are no more than a prelude to the disruption that traditional Higher Education Institutions will experience from the growth of online education. Meanwhile, institutions are making increasingly significant investments to produce MOOCs, and learners are enthusiastically enrolling in large numbers, often in tens of thousands. The analysis presented identifies a spectrum of motivating factors for universities, and suggests likely areas for future attention and developments. It further identifies a range of motivations for learner participation, which may not be identical across cultures and which MOOC providers might wish to take into account." This was my first academic publication experience in the field of MOOCs. The paper was published in the CSEDU conference proceedings, and selected for a Springer Lecture Notes volume, attracting nearly a hundred citations. The paper was written in the context of a fruitful collaboration with the University of Murcia. The paper combines two studies, one of which was my MSc dissertation. The other study consisted of a survey to MOOC learners, the design and dissemination of which I contributed towards.

137

León, M., White, S., White, S., & Dickens, K. (2015). Mentoring at scale: MOOC mentor interventions towards a connected learning community. Proc. Eur. MOOC Stakeholders Summit, 13-17. "The "Understanding Language: Learning and Teaching" MOOC produced by the University of Southampton/British Council attracted a large number of enrollments (almost 30,000 active participants) and incorporated a design structure aimed to promote social learning. This combination of high participant numbers and `learning as conversation' approach (Ferguson & Sharples, 2014) posed a significant challenge in terms of course mentoring. This article explores the novel approach to course management and facilitation used on the MOOC, with a particular focus on the training, management, and intervention strategies of course mentors. The paper outlines a cloud based, flexible and collaborative system for managing and connecting mentors which was useful in organising a geographically distributed group of mentors. Further, in the context of social learning at scale, a role of `mentor as connector' is proposed to align with the affordances of the MOOC platform and the particular course design." This paper was published in an experience track. It was written to share my experience as a MOOC mentor lead, where I was charged to design a strategy to facilitate MOOCs for thousands of learners, when published handbooks for MOOC facilitation were scarce. The paper focuses on the role of mentors as networked learning promoters. It describes a set of actions and strategies to enhance the connectivity of the learning community in a MOOC. These recommendations were well received by the FutureLearn academic network, and have been published in the FutureLearn Partners site for reference to new partners.

138

Leon Urrutia, M., Yousef, AMF., and White, S. (2015) Learning from MOOCs: the role of mentor qualities. At Web Science Education Workshop @ Web Science Conference 2015 Web Science Education Workshop @ Web Science Conference 2015, United Kingdom. 2 pp. "MOOC learners are able to share responsibilities for their learning. In the same note, course mentors play an important role in improving learning outcomes, assessment and enhancing learning activities. The aim of this paper is to determine some methodologies and approaches that can guide and help course mentors in teaching and management their MOOCs." This short paper was presented in a satellite event of the WebSci'15 conference in Oxford. It was meant to be a position paper, and does not contain research findings. The insights gathered during its production, however, were instrumental in narrowing down the topic of this thesis. The paper discusses the competencies that educators need for running a MOOC, revolving around Biggs and Tang's constructive alignment concept.

139

9. Glossary of terms
Academics - This is a key term in this thesis. This term is used throughout this thesis to refer to participants in all of the studies, who were PhD students working as facilitators in MOOCs, higher education academics with teaching responsibilities, and expert educationalists. Competencies - This is a key term in this thesis. The term is used as the predominant term to define the ability to perform tasks in professional an educational situations. Early Career Academics (ECAs) - This term is used throughout this thesis to refer to participants in one of the studies, who were PhD students working as facilitators in MOOCs. This profile is often referred to as `Early Career Researchers', but here they are called `Academics' because they were engaged in academic tasks beyond just research. In fact, many of them had academic aspirations that included teaching as part of their desired activity. Experienced Academics - This term is used throughout this thesis to refer to participants in one of the studies, who were PhD students working as facilitators in MOOCs Expert educationalists - This term is used to refer to the participants of the last study of this thesis. They were all established academics, recognised experts in the field of education technologies in higher education. Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) - This term will be used to refer to universities, interchangeably. Skills - Skill is the ability to do something well. In this thesis, this term is used in specific contexts in which the acquisition this skills takes place. For example, in the first study with ECAs, skills is frequently used in the template, in the interview questions, and in the group conversations. The term has certain crossovers with competencies, although the latter will be used as a key term through the thesis. Transformation - This is a key term in this thesis. Transformation is a marked change in form, nature, or appearance. In the context of organisations, transformation is a change in processes, procedures, and policies. In this thesis, the focus lays on the role of digital technologies in the transformation of Higher Education. Universities - This term will be used to refer to Higher Education Institutions, interchangeably. 140

World Cafe - This is a method to gather opinions and insights from a large number of members of an organisation in one individual event. The term will be used to refer to one of the studies in this thesis, where this technique was deployed.

141

10. 10.Glossary of abbreviations
AT - Activity Theory ECA - Early Career Academic HE - Higher Education HEA - Higher Education Academy HEI - Higher Education Institution ICT - Information and Communication Technologies Jisc - Joint Information Systems Committee
MOOCs - Massive Open Online Courses TA - Template Analysis

142

